Title: From Plans to Pixels: Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.15181v1

Published Time: Fri, 15 May 2026 01:39:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 43

Markdown Content:
# From Plans to Pixels: Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 

Anirudh Sundara Rajan 1, Krishna Kumar Singh 2, and Yong Jae Lee 2 

> 1

University of Wisconsin–Madison, WI, USA 

asundararaj2@wisc.edu  

> 2

Adobe Research, San Jose, CA, USA 

{krishin, yongl }@adobe.com 

Abstract. Modern image editing models produce realistic results but struggle with abstract, multi-step instructions (e.g., “make this advertise-ment more vegetarian-friendly”). Prior agent-based methods decompose such tasks but rely on handcrafted pipelines or teacher-imitation, limit-ing flexibility and decoupling learning from actual editing outcomes. We propose an experiential framework for abstract, long-horizon image edit-ing , where a planner generates structured atomic decompositions and an orchestrator selects tools and regions to execute each step. A vi-sion–language judge provides outcome-based rewards for instruction ad-herence and visual quality. The orchestrator is trained to maximize these rewards, and successful trajectories are used to refine the planner. By tightly coupling planning with reward-driven execution, our approach yields more coherent and reliable edits than single-step or rule-based multi-step baselines. Project Page: https://anisundar18.github.io/ Plan2Pix.github.io/ 

Keywords: Long-Horizon Image Editing · Multimodal Planning and Orchestration · Experiential Learning 

## 1 Introduction 

Recent advances in diffusion-based image editing have significantly improved the fidelity and controllability of instruction-based visual modifications. Meth-ods such as InstructPix2Pix [2], Prompt-to-Prompt [10], and large-scale editors like Flux Kontext [19] and Qwen-Image-Edit [47] perform well on well-specified edits (e.g., “add a hat to the man” , “change the car color to red” ), where the instruction corresponds to a simple concrete transformation. However, many real-world editing tasks are abstract, open-ended, and long-horizon. For example, adapting a student-focused loan advertisement into a cam-paign targeting rural audiences (Fig. 1) requires coordinated changes to imagery, slogans, audience-specific messaging, and environmental context—far beyond a single atomic edit. Different subtasks may also require different tools (e.g., object replacement vs. text modification). Prior agent-based systems attempt multi-step orchestration but often rely on handcrafted pipelines or teacher-imitation [52,62,17,53], fixing execution order and heuristics. These approaches  

> arXiv:2605.15181v1 [cs.CV] 14 May 2026 2A. S. Rajan et al.

Fig. 1: Given a high-level instruction such as “Adapt for a rural audience,” 

single-step editors (e.g., Flux Kontext [19] and Qwen-Image-Edit [47]) strug-gle to jointly adapt visual themes, textual content, and audience-specific con-text while preserving the original advertisement layout and identity. In contrast, our framework decomposes the task into structured subtasks and orchestrates multiple tools using outcome-based feedback. The four images to the right of our result illustrate intermediate edits produced by automatically selected tool– region combinations during orchestration (corresponding subtasks are: (1) Re-place the background with a rural scene featuring a farmer holding a basket of produce, while keeping the existing text elements intact ; (2) Replace the text ‘FLY TOWARDS THE BEST FUTURE’ with ‘STRIVE FOR A BETTER TOMOR-ROW’ ; (3) Replace ‘Cent Vidhyarthi’ with ‘Rural Education Loan’ ; and (4) Add a village house or temple in the background to reinforce the rural setting ). do not train the planner on its own distribution and do not optimize tool se-lection based on actual editing outcomes, which can lead to distribution shift, limited generalization, and poor scalability to open-ended instructions. To address these limitations, we decouple long-horizon image editing into 

planning and orchestration . Given a high-level abstract instruction, the planner produces a checklist-guided decomposition into atomic subtasks and is trained on its own sampled plans to reduce distribution shift and improving stability relative to teacher imitation. Conditioned on the plan, the orchestrator selects tools and regions, executes edits, and receives outcome-based feedback from a VLM judge evaluating instruction adherence, identity preservation, and visual quality. These rewards directly supervise tool selection, grounding decisions in empirical performance. A refinement stage prunes infeasible subtasks, aligning plans with executable actions. Together, this forms an experiential learning framework that improves through interaction with editing tools and judged outcomes. Training this system, however, poses challenges beyond standard supervi-sion: there is no large-scale dataset of abstract multi-step plans, tool selection is context-dependent and ambiguous, and multiple edited outputs can validly satisfy the same instruction. In addition, invoking modern image editing tools is computationally expensive making exploration intractable. These factors make fixed-label standard supervised training challenging. We therefore adopt an ex-periential learning paradigm grounded in observed editing outcomes. To keep training tractable, we approximate trajectory reward as the sum of indepen-Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 3

dently evaluated sub-task rewards, enabling precomputation over tool–region pairs. The planner learns structured decompositions via checklist-guided self-supervision, while the orchestrator learns tool and region selection directly from judged edits rather than prompts or teacher traces. This design removes hand-crafted rules, aligns training with inference, and improves generalization to open-ended instructions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our framework produces more reli-able, coherent, and instruction-faithful results than both single-step generation approaches and multi-step agent baselines. Our key contributions are: 

– Long-horizon, high-level image editing framework. We cast abstract, open-ended editing as a coordinated planning-and-orchestration problem, enabling multi-step reasoning beyond single-step generation. 

– Self-Supervised checklist-guided plan generation. A structured plan-ner learns multi-step decompositions from its own checklist-guided samples, reducing distribution shift. 

– Experiential orchestrator. A reward-driven policy jointly selects tools and regions based on judged executed edits, grounding decisions in empirical outcomes rather than handcrafted rules. 

– Closed-loop refinement and strong results. We prune infeasible sub-tasks using orchestration feedback and achieve state-of-the-art performance for open-ended image editing. 

## 2 Related Work 

Controllable Image Editing with Diffusion Models. Diffusion-based models have achieved strong performance in text-guided image editing [37,35]. Training-free methods such as SDEdit and Prompt-to-Prompt [28,10,34,3,11] manipulate the denoising process for prompt-aligned edits, but are typically limited to local-ized changes and may over-edit or under-follow instructions. Training-based ap-proaches, including InstructPix2Pix and MagicBrush [2,58], improve robustness via paired supervision. Later methods add control signals (e.g., masks, boxes, drag-based inputs) to enhance spatial precision [20,43,29,40,30]. However, these systems assume well-specified, low-level instructions and often require manual controls. In contrast, we target abstract, open-ended instructions requiring multi-step reasoning and coordinated tool use. 

Multimodal LLMs for Image Editing and Planning. In vision, recent work gener-ates code to invoke specialized modules, decomposing tasks into tool-executable subproblems [9,41,13,15]. These systems treat pretrained models as callable tools and use LLMs to orchestrate their composition for complex visual reasoning. Building on this paradigm of task decomposition and tool invocation, multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) extend language models with visual inputs for joint text–image reasoning [23,63,22], and have recently been applied to image editing. For ex-ample, MGIE [5] rewrites instructions before passing them to a diffusion editor, while other systems use VLM agents to decompose complex editing requests into 4 A. S. Rajan et al. 

simpler steps executed by a fixed editor [52,62,17,53]. These approaches are typ-ically training-free or rely on imitation of teacher plans, and do not learn from the outcomes of real edits—planners are not trained on their own plan distri-butions, and tool selection is not policy-optimized. In contrast, our framework couples checklist-guided planning with experiential orchestration, learning tool and region selection directly from judged editing outcomes. 

Experiential Learning for Long-Horizon Reasoning. Reinforcement learning (RL) has recently been used to enhance long-horizon reasoning in language models, enabling step decomposition, iterative refinement, and improved ro-bustness [31,8,46]. Several works extend such ideas to multimodal reasoning by training models to generate chain-of-thought explanations grounded in visual inputs [25,14]. While these approaches primarily refine the reasoning model it-self for end-to-end prediction, we adopt a complementary perspective. Instead of modifying the internal reasoning dynamics of a single editor, we learn a pol-icy that selects among multiple editing tools and spatial regions to maximize a reward signal from a learned judge. Furthermore, because diffusion-based edi-tors are computationally intensive, direct online RL over full trajectories is im-practical. We therefore introduce structured reward approximations that enable tractable policy optimization while preserving meaningful credit assignment. 

## 3 Approach 

We propose an experiential learning framework for long-horizon, open-ended im-age editing . Abstract editing tasks require both high-level reasoning and low-level tool execution, which we learn through interaction with editing tools and feedback from a learned judge. Given an input image x and instruction I, our goal is to produce an edited image ˆ x which fulfills the instruction while maintaining high visual quality and preserving essential details from the original image. We decompose this into two stages: a Planner that generates a structured sequence of sub-tasks, and an 

Orchestrator that selects tools and/or regions to execute each step. Training is guided by rewards from an MLLM-based judge evaluating correctness, visual quality, and consistency with the original image. This design is motivated by two observations: abstract instructions require multi-step, heterogeneous operations, and direct end-to-end optimization over full editing trajectories is computationally expensive. We address both via struc-tured decomposition and efficient reward approximation. 

3.1 Stage 1: Planner via Checklist-Guided Self-Training 

Given an input image x and high-level instruction I, the planner (a multimodal LLM) generates an ordered sequence of sub-tasks P = {s1, . . . , s T }, where each 

st is a structured editing step (e.g., “add a laptop and organized business sup-plies to the bedside table,”). This decomposition converts an abstract objective into executable atomic operations, enabling modular reasoning and interpretable multi-step editing. Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 5

Fig. 2: Checklist-guided planner (Stage 1). Given an input advertisement and a high-level instruction (left, e.g., “Target business travelers with added corporate benefits”), the planner generates a structured, ordered sequence of subtasks (center) that explicitly address checklist items (right). In this exam-ple, the generated plan includes adapting the room aesthetics for a professional audience, adding work-related objects, and introducing business-oriented promo-tional text. Checklists can be provided by human or LLM annotators, helping enforce coverage and interpretability while enabling the planner to produce mod-ular plans for downstream orchestration. 

Checklist Construction. Rather than imitating a teacher model [53], we intro-duce a checklist C = {c1, . . . , c K } specifying criteria a satisfactory edit must meet (e.g., product substitution, semantic alignment, layout coherence). Dur-ing data construction, the planner is prompted with ( x, I, C) to generate plans that explicitly satisfy all checklist items (Fig. 2). Unlike loosely related prior checklist-based reward alignment for LLMs [42], we use checklists for structured plan generation for long-horizon image editing. This checklist-guided prompting serves two purposes. First, it enforces cov-erage, ensuring the planner addresses all relevant aspects rather than produc-ing partial plans. Second, it provides modular, human-interpretable supervision without requiring gold-standard plans. Compared to hard-coded templates, it avoids brittle heuristics while retaining structured guidance. Our experiments in Appendix B.2 demonstrate that plans generated with checklist guidance provide greater coverage and suggest more contextual edits compared to plans generated without a checklist. 

Self-Supervised Fine-Tuning. Let P∗ = {s∗

> 1

, . . . , s ∗ 

> T

} denote the checklist-guided plan produced by the planner, where each sub-task s∗ 

> t

is a token sequence s∗ 

> t

=(s∗

> t, 1

, . . . , s ∗ 

> t,N t

). The planner outputs a structured list of sub-tasks, with each list element corresponding to a distinct operation. We then fine-tune the planner to reproduce the entire plan conditioned only on ( x, I ) via autoregressive likelihood maximization: 

Lplanner = E(x,I )∼D 

"

−

> T

X

> t=1
> Nt

X

> j=1

log pθ

 s∗ 

> t,j

| x, I, s ∗

> <t

, s ∗

> t,<j

#

, (1) 6 A. S. Rajan et al. 

Fig. 3: Reward-driven orchestration (Stage 2). Given an input image and a high-level instruction (e.g., “Target business travelers with added corporate benefits”), the orchestrator selects appropriate tools and spatial regions to ex-ecute a specific subtask (e.g., replacing the red pillows with neutral-toned pro-fessional decor pillows). The edited result is then evaluated by a VLM judge, which assesses instruction adherence, identity preservation, and visual quality. The feedback from the judge is used to improve future tool/region selection de-cisions. where D is the training distribution, s∗ 

> <t

denotes all tokens from preceding sub-tasks {s∗

> 1

, . . . , s ∗

> t−1

} and s∗ 

> t,<j

denotes the tokens preceding position j within sub-task t.Autoregressive modeling over the full plan captures dependencies across sub-tasks, which is crucial for long-horizon editing (e.g., in advertisement redesign, slogan changes may depend on prior object substitutions). Modeling the plan as an ordered list of subtasks enables coherent sequencing and global consistency while avoiding contradictory operations. Importantly, supervision is derived from plans sampled from the planner itself under checklist prompting. The model is thus trained via self-distillation, keeping supervision close to its native generation distribution rather than relying on external demonstrations. This has been shown to reduce distribution shift at inference and improves robustness and generalization compared to pure off-policy imitation [61,16,39]. At inference, the checklist is no longer needed; the fine-tuned planner directly generates a structured multi-step plan from ( x, I ). 

3.2 Stage 2: Orchestrator via Reward-Driven Tool Selection 

Given ( x, I, P), the orchestrator (a multimodal LLM with parameters ϕ) selects, for each sub-task st, a tool at and a region rt. Tools (detailed in Sec. 3.5) are represented as token sequences describing editing operations (e.g., object re-placement, style transfer, text editing), while regions correspond to either the full image or candidate object/text areas proposed by segmentation or bounding-box models. This discrete representation frames tool and region selection as a language-generation problem, enabling seamless integration with the LLM ar-chitecture without task-specific control logic. Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 7

Executing the selected sequence yields the final edited image: 

ˆx = faT ,r T ◦ · · · ◦ fa1,r 1 (x), (2) where fat,r t applies tool at to region rt (when applicable). Sequential composition allows later edits to refine or build upon earlier ones, which is essential for long-horizon tasks. 

Reward Function. We use a strong MLLM-based judge [33] to assign a scalar reward R(ˆ x, x, I ) conditioned on the edited image ˆ x, the original image x, and the instruction I. The judge evaluates instruction adherence, identity preser-vation, and overall visual quality (e.g., layout fidelity and realism; see Fig. 3). Since multiple outputs may satisfy the same instruction, a scalar reward pro-vides flexible supervision without requiring pixel-level alignment. Importantly, the judge is used only to provide outcome signals, rather than dense token-level supervision. Implementation details of the judge are included in Appendix C.2. As demonstrated in our user studies (Sec. 4.1), improvements transfer to human preference, suggesting that the learned policy is not merely overfitting to the judge’s scoring function. 

Policy Optimization Objective. Our objective is to maximize the reward of the full editing trajectory. Given tool–region decisions ( a1: T , r 1: T ), executing the edits produces a final image ˆ x, which is evaluated by the VLM judge with reward 

R(ˆ x, x, I ). We therefore optimize the expected trajectory reward: 

max  

> ϕ

E(a1: T ,r 1: T )∼πϕ

R(ˆ x, x, I ). (3) Optimizing the trajectory-level reward encourages coordinated decisions across steps, since the quality of later edits depends on earlier tool and region selections. In practice, we sample candidate trajectories and select high-reward ones as supervision signals: ( a∗ 

> 1: T

, r ∗ 

> 1: T

) = arg max (a1: T ,r 1: T ) R(ˆ x, x, I ). When multiple trajectories achieve comparable rewards, all can be used for training. We then train the orchestrator to reproduce these high-reward trajectories by maximizing their likelihood: 

Lorch = −E(x,I, P,a ∗  

> 1: T,r ∗
> 1: T)

" TX

> t=1

log πϕ

 a∗ 

> t

, r ∗ 

> t

| x, I, P, a ∗

> <t

, r ∗

> <t

#

. (4) This aligns training with inference-time behavior, grounding tool and region selection in empirically successful trajectories while remaining computationally tractable. 

Efficient Reward Approximation Learning high-reward editing actions requires exploring tool and region selections, but evaluating a full trajectory is costly due to sequential diffusion calls. Enumerating and scoring all candidate sequences of-fline is also infeasible, as the number of tool–region combinations grows exponen-tially with the number of sub-tasks. To make training tractable, we introduce two structured approximations that exploit the compositional nature of high-level image edits. 8 A. S. Rajan et al. 

Additive Reward Approximation. Many edits correspond to semantically dis-tinct operations (e.g., object replacement, slogan modification, background re-coloring) that are largely independent. Moreover, achieving a high-quality fi-nal result requires each sub-task to be executed correctly. We therefore ap-proximate the trajectory-level reward as the sum of sub-task contributions: 

R(ˆ x, x, I ) ≈ PTt=1 Rt, where Rt reflects whether sub-task st has been successfully completed. 

Original-Image Independence Approximation. Many edits correspond to largely independent operations, so the effect of a tool is often weakly dependent on prior edits (e.g., product replacement typically does not depend strongly on an earlier background object change). We therefore estimate the contribution of a tool by evaluating it directly on the original image rather than on intermediate edits. Formally, let xt−1 denote the intermediate image before applying ( at, r t). We approximate Rt

 fat,r t (xt−1), x, I  ≈ Rt

 fat,r t (x), x, I .

Together, these approximations allow us to precompute all tool–region candi-dates and their rewards, {(a, r, R a,r )}. For each sub-task, we identify the highest-reward tools and train the orchestrator to predict these selections. 

3.3 Closing the Loop: Plan Refinement 

To ensure coordination between planner and orchestrator, we refine the initial plan by removing sub-tasks whose maximum achievable reward across tools and regions falls below a threshold τ : max a,r Ra,r (st) < τ . Such sub-tasks correspond to operations unsupported by the available toolset. Pruning them prevents sys-tematically infeasible decompositions and improves consistency between plan-ning and execution. Thus, before training the orchestrator, we retrain the plan-ner on the revised plans to better reflect the feasible action space. We then train the orchestrator only on the subtasks which achieve a reward greater than the threshold. This closed-loop refinement grounds high-level reasoning in exe-cutable actions, enabling scalable and robust long-horizon image editing without handcrafted pipelines. 

3.4 Inference via Verifier-Guided Selection 

To improve robustness during sequential editing, we augment the orchestra-tor with a lightweight verifier-guided selection step. Specifically, we train a verifier to score intermediate edits. Given the original image x, a sub-task 

st, and the edited image ˜ xt = fat,r t (xt−1), the verifier predicts a score re-flecting sub-task correctness, identity preservation, and visual quality. Teacher scores from the same VLM judge used during training [33] are distilled into a smaller VLM [1], enabling efficient inference. For each sub-task, the orches-trator proposes a distribution over tool–region pairs. We select the top-k can-didates by policy likelihood, execute these edits, and re-rank them using the verifier: ( a∗ 

> t

, r ∗ 

> t

) = arg max i∈{ 1,...,k } Verifier  fa(i) 

> t,r (i)
> t

(xt−1), x, s t

. The highest-scoring edit is used for the next step. This proposal–re-ranking strategy reduces Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 9

error accumulation while remaining tractable; in practice, k = 3 or k = 5 works well. After completing all sub-tasks, we apply a lightweight refinement on the final result to improve coherence while preserving the intended edits. 

3.5 Tools 

Our framework uses analysis tools for region discovery, whole-image editors for global changes, and region-level editors for localized edits. 

Analysis Tools. These identify editable regions: (i) SAM-2 + Qwen-3VL [36] for semantic segmentation with masks and descriptions; (ii) DeepSeek-OCR [45] for layout and text detection; (iii) Qwen-Layered [54] for foreground-to-background layer decomposition, capturing larger structural regions that may not be detected by object-level segmentation; (iv) Qwen-BBox [1] for instruction-guided bounding boxes, useful for edits involving adding or modify-ing objects not easily captured by image-only analysis. 

Whole-Image Editing Tools. (v) Qwen-Image-Edit [47] and (vi) Flux-Kontext-Edit [19] apply instruction-guided edits to the entire image. 

Region-Level Editing Tools. (vii) Flux-Inpaint [19] performs masked diffusion editing on regions specified by an analysis tool. Whole-image tools operate directly, while region-level tools require aprior analysis step and a valid region index. Allowed compositions are: (1) Layered/BBox/SAM-2/OCR → Flux-Inpaint; (2) Qwen-Image-Edit (stan-dalone); (3) Flux-Kontext-Edit (standalone). All tools return structured JSON outputs for consistent orchestration. A comprehensive description of our tools is provided in Appendix C.1. 

## 4 Experiments 

Implementation Details The planner and orchestrator are initialized from Qwen3-VL-8B [1] and fine-tuned with LoRA [12]. The planner uses a lightweight LoRA setup ( r = 1) applied to q proj and v proj , while the orchestrator uses higher capacity ( r = 64) to enable flexible tool selection. Both are trained with learning rate 2 × 10 −4 and scaling factor α = 2 r. Training is performed on a single node with 8 A100 80GB GPUs using batch size 16. 

Dataset Details We use images from MadVerse [38], a large-scale multilingual advertisement dataset. For each image, we generate three abstract, high-level editing tasks using GPT-5, designed to require multi-step transformations such as cultural adaptation, audience retargeting, promotional shifts, product sub-stitution, or stylistic changes. For training the orchestrator, we use a training dataset with 7,598 instances. For testing, we use a dataset comprising 200 adver-tisement editing requests. In addition, we also evaluate our approach on standard image editing benchmarks such as GEdit-Bench [24] and MagicBrush [57]. We report these results in Appendix B.1. 10 A. S. Rajan et al. 

4.1 Main Results: Comparison to End-to-End Editing Baselines 

We first compare to recent state-of-the-art open-source image editing models to evaluate their ability to perform complex edits directly from high-level instruc-tions. In particular, we test whether these models can reason about multi-step modifications and execute them correctly in a single editing pass. 

Baselines We compare against FLUX.1-Kontext-dev [19] and Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 [47]. We evaluate these models in two settings. In the first, the high-level instruction is provided directly to the model, testing its ability to reason and perform the edit in a single step. In the second, we use our base Qwen3-VL-8B model to decompose the task into a sequence of simpler steps, which are then provided to the editing model at once. This setting evaluates whether a plan generated by a general MLLM can be executed effectively in a single-shot edit. 

Evaluation A successful edit should satisfy three key criteria: correct execution of the instruction, preservation of important elements from the input image, and high visual quality. To evaluate these aspects, we use a strong MLLM as a judge, specifically Gemini-3-Pro [7]. Determining whether an edit follows the instruction often requires world knowledge and reasoning about the intended changes. Therefore, we ask Gemini to score each category on a scale of 1–5 based on the input image, edited image, and the high-level task. Visual quality is instruction-agnostic and is evaluated using only the edited image. To reduce potential bias from any single judge model, we use a different judge during evaluation from training, and final comparisons are corroborated with human A/B studies. This ensures that improvements reflect perceptual and instruction-level gains beyond judge-specific artifacts. Further details of the evaluation setup are provided in Appendix C.3. 

Results Our method achieves the highest instruction-following score, highlighting the benefit of explicit planning and step-by-step execution for complex edits; see Table 1. While FLUX.1-Kontext-dev (High-Level Instruction) attains higher identity preservation and visual quality scores, this is mainly because it often leaves the image nearly unchanged, as reflected by its low instruction-following score (see Fig. 5 for examples). In contrast, our method performs the requested edits while maintaining strong input preservation and visual quality. 0 20 40 60 80 100     

> Percentage (%)
> 58.12% 17.29% 24.58%
> 47.43% 23.24% 29.33%
> Ours
> Ours
> Flux Kontext
> Qwen-Image-Edit

Fig. 4: User study (random-ized A/B testing). Results show a consistent human pref-erence for our approach. 

User Studies To corroborate the MLLM judge results, we conduct a user study using ran-domized A/B testing. Participants are shown paired results in random order and asked to select their preferred edit or indicate a tie, while accounting for instruction follow-ing, identity preservation, and visual quality. Each pair is evaluated by three unique users. As shown in Fig. 4, highlighting the advan-tages of long-horizon planning and reward-driven orchestration for producing coherent, instruction-faithful edits. Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 11                   

> Method Instruction Following Identity Preservation Visual Quality
> FLUX.1-Kontext-dev (High-Level Instruction) 2.32 4.32 3.525
> FLUX.1-Kontext-dev (Qwen3-VL-8B Plan) 3.33 3.005 2.405 Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 (High-Level Instruction) 3.355 2.769 2.26 Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 (Qwen3-VL-8B Plan) 3.807 3.005 2.16
> Ours 4.196 3.155 2.525

Table 1: Comparison with end-to-end editing baselines. Scores are averaged Gemini-3-Pro evaluations. Baselines either preserve the original image but fail to execute the instruction, or attempt the edit at the cost of identity preservation. Our method achieves the strongest instruction execution while maintaining good identity preservation. 

4.2 Ablation Study: Orchestrator Design Choices 

We next isolate the key design choices underlying the Stage 2 orchestrator. Specifically, we demonstrate that (i) leveraging multiple tools outperforms rely-ing on a single tool, (ii) training the orchestrator to learn an explicit tool-calling policy yields better performance than prompting the base model to do so in a training-free manner, and (iii) we study the effect of using different k values (number of candidates) during inference. 

Experiment Details To isolate the design choices of the orchestrator, we fix the multi-step plan generated by our planner model across all variants. We then com-pare the following configurations: (i) FLUX.1-Kontext-dev (sequential) : FLUX-Kontext is applied sequentially, once per instruction in the plan. (ii) Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 (sequential) : Qwen-Image-Edit is invoked sequentially for each instruction. (iii) Qwen-BBox + FLUX Inpaint : For each step, we first generate task-relevant regions using Qwen-BBox. A base Qwen3-VL model then selects the appropriate region, and the edit is applied locally using FLUX Inpaint. This process is repeated for every instruction in the plan. (iv) Base-Orchestrator : Tool selection is performed by an untrained base Qwen3-VL model, without learning an explicit tool-calling policy. We provide the same system prompt used for our model, which describes the strengths and capabilities of the available tools. Fi-nally, to study the effect of different values of k during inference, we evaluate the performance with k = 1 , 3, and 5. 

Evaluation We evaluate visual quality using the same metric as the previous section. For instruction following and identity preservation, since all models in this experiment receive the same instructions, we adopt a more detailed evalu-ation. This is because models are now required to follow a specific plan that is provided uniformly to all of them. To do this, we prompt GPT-5 with the input image, high-level task, and the multi-step plan to generate a set of constraints. These constraints specify elements that should be preserved, modified, or added, as well as conditions on their placement, orientation, color, and other attributes. We then ask Gemini-3-Pro [7] to evaluate the edited image against these con-straints, given the input image and task. For each constraint, the judge deter-mines whether it is satisfied. We report the percentage of satisfied constraints 12 A. S. Rajan et al.                 

> Method Instr (%) VQ
> FLUX.1-Kontext-dev (sequential) 53.3 2.05 Qwen-BBox + FLUX Inpaint 60.0 2.105 Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 (sequential) 61.9 2.29 Qwen3VL-Base (k=5) 61.6 2.445 Ours (k=1) 63.9 2.245 Ours (k=3) 71.8 2.38 Ours (k=5) 74.0 2.525

Table 2: Instruction satisfaction (Instr) measured as the percentage of checklist constraints satisfied and Visual Quality (VQ). Increasing inference branches im-proves both metrics. Training the orchestrator shows significant improvements (12.4%) over the base model. as the instruction satisfaction/identity preservation score. Further details of the evaluation setup are provided in Appendix C.3. As shown in Table 2, our trained orchestrator significantly outperforms all single-tool baselines as well as the untrained orchestrator. This highlights both the benefits of tool use and the importance of learning an effective tool-selection policy through experience. Furthermore, our multi-branch variants achieve the highest instruction satis-faction and visual quality, demonstrating that structured planning with reward-driven orchestration more effectively satisfies detailed constraints than strong end-to-end baselines. Moreover, increasing the number of candidates (k) consis-tently improves performance: instruction satisfaction rises from 63.9% (1 branch) to 71.8% (3 branches) and 74.0% (5 branches), with corresponding gains in visual quality. This trend indicates that broader search during orchestration enables more constraint-compliant and higher-quality edits. 

4.3 Ablation Study: Plan Dataset: Self- vs. External Supervision 

We next evaluate our checklist-guided planner to assess whether on-policy self-distillation improves plan quality and distributional alignment compared to di-rect teacher imitation. Specifically, in Sec. 3.1, we use a checklist to encourage comprehensive plan generation. An alternative to checklist-guided self-training is to directly fine-tune the base model on plans generated by a stronger teacher LLM. However, such supervision may introduce distribution shift if teacher-generated plans deviate from the base model’s native generation patterns. To quantify this effect, we measure the base model’s perplexity under teacher forc-ing on two sets of plans: (1) checklist-conditioned plans generated by the base model itself, and (2) plans generated by a teacher LLM (GPT-5 [33]). As shown in Table 3 (left), teacher-generated plans yield substantially higher perplexity than self-generated checklist plans. This gap indicates that teacher plans lie far outside the base model’s intrinsic distribution, providing empir-ical evidence of potential instability under off-policy imitation. In contrast, Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 13       

> Plan Source Perplexity
> Checklist (self-generated) 4.89 GPT-5 (teacher-generated) 61.25
> Setting Avg. Max Reward
> Before filtering 4.1708 After filtering 4.3095

Table 3: Left: Perplexity of the base model on different plan sources (lower is better). Right: Average maximum achievable sub-task reward (Gemini 3 Pro judge) before and after plan refinement. our checklist-guided self-distillation maintains on-policy supervision and better aligns training with the model’s natural generation behavior. 

4.4 Ablation Study: Effect of Plan Refinement 

To quantify the impact of our closed-loop plan refinement (Sec. 3.3), we compute, for each sub-task, the maximum achievable reward across all tools and regions, max a,r Ra,r (st), and average this value over the samples. Rewards are assigned by a VLM-based judge. Table 3 (right) reports the average maximum reward before and after filtering infeasible sub-tasks. Filtering infeasible sub-tasks increases the average reward, quantifying improved compatibility between plans and executable tools. 

4.5 Qualitative Results 

Figures 5, 6 and 7 showcase our method on diverse long-horizon advertisement editing tasks that require coordinated updates to visuals, text, layout, and brand-ing. Note that we blur the faces in the images to preserve the anonymity of individuals. 

Long-Horizon Adaptation. Figures 5 and 6 presents challenging transforma-tions, including adapting for business travelers, American Independence Day etc. These tasks involve coupled changes to background, color palette, slogans, badges, and overall branding. Single-step editors often produce partial or exces-sive modifications that disrupt layout consistency or identity preservation. In contrast, our method generates more globally coherent, instruction-faithful edits while maintaining better brand consistency. 

Planner–Orchestrator Decomposition. Figure 7 illustrates how checklist-guided planning decomposes abstract instructions into atomic subtasks that are sequen-tially executed via reward-driven orchestration. This structured decomposition enables comprehensive coverage and coherent multi-step transformations, rather than isolated local edits. Overall, these results demonstrate that coupling on-policy planning with outcome-driven orchestration enables robust handling of abstract, open-ended image editing tasks beyond the capabilities of single-step or rule-based multi-tool pipelines. Appendix A presents additional qualitative step-by-step visualizations. 14 A. S. Rajan et al. 

Input Image FLUX Kontext Qwen-Edit Ours   

> Task: Target business travelers with added corporate benefits
> Task: Adapt for Independence Day in the United States.

Fig. 5: Qualitative results on diverse long-horizon advertisement edit-ing tasks. These examples show two challenging instructions—adapting for Business travelers, and for American Independence Day. Single-step editors (Flux Kontext [19] and Qwen-Image-Edit [47]) often perform partial stylistic changes or introduce minimal or shallow modifications in text, layout, or branding. In con-trast, our method consistently produces edits that are more instruction-faithful and globally coherent, jointly updating visual themes, textual content, layout elements, and brand messaging. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of checklist-guided planning and reward-driven orchestration in handling abstract, multi-step transformations beyond localized edits. Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 15 

Input Image FLUX Kontext Qwen-Edit Ours    

> Task: Create a festive edition for Lunar New Year celebrations
> Task: Adapt for a Western audience emphasizing tropical fruit flavors
> Task: Adapt for a fitness-conscious audience

Fig. 6: Qualitative results on diverse long-horizon advertisement edit-ing tasks. These examples show three challenging instructions—adapting for Lunar New Year, western audience, and for fitness-conscious audience. Our method consistently produces edits that are faithful to the instruction and glob-ally coherent, jointly updating visual themes, textual content, layout elements, and brand messaging. Note that we blur the faces in the images to preserve the anonymity of individuals. 16 A. S. Rajan et al. 2. Change the color 

of the glass and plate 

to black 

qwen -layered 

(region4) + 

flux_inpaint 

7. Change the 

shadow figure on the 

left to a Halloween 

witch or ghost 

silhouette with 

glowing eyes and a 

dark cape 

qwen_image_edit 

12. Add a faint moon 

in the background 

sky to enhance the 

spooky atmosphere 

qwen image edit 

13. Introduce a subtle 

fog effect around the 

table to deepen the 

Halloween ambiance 

qwen -layered 

(region3) + flux 

inpaint 

10. Replace the text 

'Happy Dussehra!' 

with 'Happy 

Halloween!' in a 

spooky font, keeping 

the same position 

and yellow color 

deepseek -ocr 

(region1) + flux 

inpaint 

Task: Adapt for 

Halloween with a 

spooky twist 

3. Replace the 

background purple 

fabric with a beach 

scene featuring sun, 

sand, and palm trees, 

ensuring the Cream 

Bell logo and 'Royal 

Affair' text remain 

clearly visible 

qwen -layered 

(region2) + flux inpaint 

4. Add small beach 

accessories such as a 

sun hat, sunglasses, 

and a beach towel 

near the ice cream 

tubs to enhance the 

beach atmosphere 

qwen image edit 

6. Replace the 

'INDULGE IN ROYAL 

ICE CREAM' headline 

with 'Chill Out –

Sweet Summer Sips!' 

in a playful, summery 

font 

deepseek -ocr 

(region1) + flux 

inpaint 

7. Modify the 'Trial 

Offer ₹20/ - off' badge 

to 'Scoop Now ₹20/ -

Off!' with a beach ball 

or ice cream cone icon 

for visual alignment 

qwen -layered 

(region4) + flux 

inpaint 

8. Replace the fine 

print at the bottom 

with 'Perfect for 

beach days — enjoy it 

poolside or under the 

sun!' to reinforce the 

summer theme 

qwen image edit 

Task: Adapt into a 

summer beach -

themed advertisement 

Fig. 7: Planner–orchestrator subtasks and their outputs. Each row be-gins with the input advertisement (first column) and a high-level instruction. The subsequent columns show the sequence of subtask plans and edits produced by our system. These results illustrate how our checklist-guided planning decom-poses an abstract instruction into concrete atomic edits and how our orchestrator selects tool-regions to execute those edits to produce a coherent, instruction-faithful final design. Due to space constraints, we only show samples from the full sequence. 

## 5 Conclusion 

We presented an experiential framework for long-horizon, open-ended image edit-ing. By combining checklist-guided, on-policy planning with reward-driven or-chestration, our approach moves beyond handcrafted pipelines and single-step generation. The planner learns structured decompositions, while the orchestrator selects tools and regions from outcome-based feedback, with closed-loop refine-ment aligning plans with executable actions. Extensive experiments and user studies show that our method produces more coherent, instruction-faithful edits than strong single-step and rule-based multi-step baselines, highlighting the value of coupling planning with experiential learning for abstract, multi-step editing tasks. 

Acknowledgements. We thank Scott Cohen for his technical feedback and support throughout the project. We thank Eslam Abdelrahman for valuable Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 17 

discussions and suggestions on evaluating image editing systems and designing the evaluation. We also thank Sicheng Mo for his help with evaluation design, and Zhaowen Wang for discussions regarding image editing tools. 

Disclaimer. All trademarks and copyrighted images are the property of their respective owners and are used here for identification and descriptive purposes only. No affiliation, sponsorship, or endorsement is implied. 

## References 

1. Bai, S., Cai, Y., Chen, R., Chen, K., Chen, X., Cheng, Z., Deng, L., Ding, W., Gao, C., Ge, C., et al.: Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 (2025) 2. Brooks, T., Holynski, A., Efros, A.A.: Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing instructions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 18392–18402 (2023) 3. Cao, M., Wang, X., Qi, Z., Shan, Y., Qie, X., Zheng, Y.: Masactrl: Tuning-free mu-tual self-attention control for consistent image synthesis and editing. In: Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 22560– 22570 (2023) 4. Deng, C., Zhu, D., Li, K., Gou, C., Li, F., Wang, Z., Zhong, S., Yu, W., Nie, X., Song, Z., et al.: Emerging properties in unified multimodal pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14683 (2025) 5. Fu, T.J., Hu, W., Du, X., Wang, W.Y., Yang, Y., Gan, Z.: Guiding instruction-based image editing via multimodal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17102 (2023) 6. Google DeepMind: Gemini 2.0. https://gemini.google.com/ (2025), accessed: 2026-03-12 7. Google DeepMind: Gemini 3 Pro (2026) 8. Guo, D., Yang, D., Zhang, H., Song, J., Zhang, R., Xu, R., Zhu, Q., Ma, S., Wang, P., Bi, X., et al.: Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 (2025) 9. Gupta, T., Kembhavi, A.: Visual programming: Compositional visual reasoning without training. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition. pp. 14953–14962 (2023) 10. Hertz, A., Mokady, R., Tenenbaum, J., Aberman, K., Pritch, Y., Cohen-Or, D.: Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626 (2022) 11. Hertz, A., Voynov, A., Fruchter, S., Cohen-Or, D.: Style aligned image generation via shared attention. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 4775–4785 (2024) 12. Hu, E.J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., Chen, W., et al.: Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. Iclr 1(2), 3 (2022) 13. Hu, Y., Shi, W., Fu, X., Roth, D., Ostendorf, M., Zettlemoyer, L., Smith, N.A., Kr-ishna, R.: Visual sketchpad: Sketching as a visual chain of thought for multimodal language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09403 (2024) 14. Huang, W., Jia, B., Zhai, Z., Cao, S., Ye, Z., Zhao, F., Xu, Z., Hu, Y., Lin, S.: Vision-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in multimodal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06749 (2025) 18 A. S. Rajan et al. 15. Huang, Z., Ji, Y., Rajan, A.S., Cai, Z., Xiao, W., Wang, H., Hu, J., Lee, Y.J.: Vi-sualtoolagent (vista): A reinforcement learning framework for visual tool selection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2026) 16. H¨ ubotter, J., L¨ ubeck, F., Behric, L., Baumann, A., Bagatella, M., Marta, D., Hakimi, I., Shenfeld, I., Kleine Buening, T., Guestrin, C., Krause, A.: Reinforce-ment learning via self-distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.20802 (2026) 17. Ji, L., Qi, C., Chen, Q.: Instruction-based image editing with planning, reasoning, and generation. In: ICCV (2025) 18. Ku, M., Jiang, D., Wei, C., Yue, X., Chen, W.: Viescore: Towards explainable metrics for conditional image synthesis evaluation. In: Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). pp. 12268–12290 (2024) 19. Labs, B.F., Batifol, S., Blattmann, A., Boesel, F., Consul, S., Diagne, C., Dockhorn, T., English, J., English, Z., Esser, P., Kulal, S., Lacey, K., Levi, Y., Li, C., Lorenz, D., M¨ uller, J., Podell, D., Rombach, R., Saini, H., Sauer, A., Smith, L.: Flux.1 kontext: Flow matching for in-context image generation and editing in latent space (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.15742 

20. Li, Y., Liu, H., Wu, Q., Mu, F., Yang, J., Gao, J., Li, C., Lee, Y.J.: Gligen: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 22511–22521 (2023) 21. Lin, B., Li, Z., Cheng, X., Niu, Y., Ye, Y., He, X., Yuan, S., Yu, W., Wang, S., Ge, Y., et al.: Uniworld-v1: High-resolution semantic encoders for unified visual understanding and generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.03147 (2025) 22. Liu, H., Li, C., Li, Y., Lee, Y.J.: Improved baselines with visual instruction tuning. In: CVPR (2024) 23. Liu, H., Li, C., Wu, Q., Lee, Y.J.: Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems 36 , 34892–34916 (2023) 24. Liu, S., Han, Y., Xing, P., Yin, F., Wang, R., Cheng, W., Liao, J., Wang, Y., Fu, H., Han, C., et al.: Step1x-edit: A practical framework for general image editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.17761 (2025) 25. Liu, Z., Sun, Z., Zang, Y., Dong, X., Cao, Y., Duan, H., Lin, D., Wang, J.: Visual-rft: Visual reinforcement fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01785 (2025) 26. Luo, X., Wang, J., Wu, C., Xiao, S., Jiang, X., Lian, D., Zhang, J., Liu, D., et al.: Editscore: Unlocking online rl for image editing via high-fidelity reward modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23909 (2025) 27. Ma, S., Guo, Y., Su, J., Huang, Q., Zhou, Z., Wang, Y.: Talk2image: Amulti-agent system for multi-turn image generation and editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06916 (2025) 28. Meng, C., He, Y., Song, Y., Song, J., Wu, J., Zhu, J.Y., Ermon, S.: Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.01073 (2021) 29. Mou, C., Wang, X., Song, J., Shan, Y., Zhang, J.: Dragondiffusion: Enabling drag-style manipulation on diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02421 (2023) 30. Nie, W., Liu, S., Mardani, M., Liu, C., Eckart, B., Vahdat, A.: Composi-tional text-to-image generation with dense blob representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.08246 (2024) 31. OpenAI: Learning to reason with llms. https://openai.com/index/ learning-to-reason-with-llms/ (2024), accessed: 2025-05-13 32. OpenAI: Introducing 4o image generation. https://openai.com/index/ introducing-4o-image-generation/ (2025), accessed: 2026-03-12 Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 19 33. OpenAI: ChatGPT (2026) 34. Parmar, G., Kumar Singh, K., Zhang, R., Li, Y., Lu, J., Zhu, J.Y.: Zero-shot image-to-image translation. In: ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings. pp. 1–11 (2023) 35. Podell, D., English, Z., Lacey, K., Blattmann, A., Dockhorn, T., M¨ uller, J., Penna, J., Rombach, R.: Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952 (2023) 36. Ravi, N., Gabeur, V., Hu, Y.T., Hu, R., Ryali, C., Ma, T., Khedr, H., R¨ adle, R., Rolland, C., Gustafson, L., Mintun, E., Pan, J., Alwala, K.V., Carion, N., Wu, C.Y., Girshick, R., Doll´ ar, P., Feichtenhofer, C.: Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714 (2024), https://arxiv.org/ abs/2408.00714 

37. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., Ommer, B.: High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 10684–10695 (2022) 38. Sagar, A., Srivastava, R., Venna, V.K., Sarvadevabhatla, R.K., et al.: Madverse: A hierarchical dataset of multi-lingual ads from diverse sources and categories. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision. pp. 8087–8096 (2024) 39. Shenfeld, I., Damani, M., H¨ ubotter, J., Agrawal, P.: Self-distillation enables con-tinual learning (2026), https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.19897 

40. Shi, Y., Xue, C., Liew, J.H., Pan, J., Yan, H., Zhang, W., Tan, V.Y., Bai, S.: Dragdiffusion: Harnessing diffusion models for interactive point-based image edit-ing. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 8839–8849 (2024) 41. Sur´ ıs, D., Menon, S., Vondrick, C.: Vipergpt: Visual inference via python execu-tion for reasoning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 11888–11898 (2023) 42. Viswanathan, V., Sun, Y., Ma, S., Kong, X., Cao, M., Neubig, G., Wu, T.: Check-lists are better than reward models for aligning language models. In: NeurIPS (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18624 

43. Wang, X., Darrell, T., Rambhatla, S.S., Girdhar, R., Misra, I.: Instancediffusion: Instance-level control for image generation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 6232–6242 (2024) 44. Wang, Z., Li, A., Li, Z., Liu, X.: Genartist: Multimodal llm as an agent for unified image generation and editing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 

37 , 128374–128395 (2024) 45. Wei, H., Sun, Y., Li, Y.: Deepseek-ocr: Contexts optical compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.18234 (2025) 46. Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q.V., Zhou, D., et al.: Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems 35 , 24824–24837 (2022) 47. Wu, C., Li, J., Zhou, J., Lin, J., Gao, K., Yan, K., ming Yin, S., Bai, S., Xu, X., Chen, Y., Chen, Y., Tang, Z., Zhang, Z., Wang, Z., Yang, A., Yu, B., Cheng, C., Liu, D., Li, D., Zhang, H., Meng, H., Wei, H., Ni, J., Chen, K., Cao, K., Peng, L., Qu, L., Wu, M., Wang, P., Yu, S., Wen, T., Feng, W., Xu, X., Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., Zhu, Y., Wu, Y., Cai, Y., Liu, Z.: Qwen-image technical report (2025), 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.02324 

48. Wu, C., Zheng, P., Yan, R., Xiao, S., Luo, X., Wang, Y., Li, W., Jiang, X., Liu, Y., Zhou, J., et al.: Omnigen2: Exploration to advanced multimodal generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18871 (2025) 20 A. S. Rajan et al. 49. Wu, K., Jiang, S., Ku, M., Nie, P., Liu, M., Chen, W.: Editreward: Ahuman-aligned reward model for instruction-guided image editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26346 (2025) 50. Xiao, S., Wang, Y., Zhou, J., Yuan, H., Xing, X., Yan, R., Li, C., Wang, S., Huang, T., Liu, Z.: Omnigen: Unified image generation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 13294–13304 (2025) 51. Yang, J., Zhang, H., Li, F., Zou, X., Li, C., Gao, J.: Set-of-mark prompting un-leashes extraordinary visual grounding in gpt-4v. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11441 (2023) 52. Yang, L., Yu, Z., Meng, C., Xu, M., Ermon, S., Cui, B.: Mastering text-to-image diffusion: Recaptioning, planning, and generating with multimodal llms. In: ICML (2024) 53. Yeh, C.H., Wang, Y., Zhao, N., Zhang, R., Li, Y., Ma, Y., Singh, K.K.: Beyond simple edits: X-planner for complex instruction-based image editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05259 (2025) 54. Yin, S., Zhang, Z., Tang, Z., Gao, K., Xu, X., Yan, K., Li, J., Chen, Y., Chen, Y., Shum, H.Y., Ni, L.M., Zhou, J., Lin, J., Wu, C.: Qwen-image-layered: Towards in-herent editability via layer decomposition (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2512. 15603 

55. Yu, Q., Chow, W., Yue, Z., Pan, K., Wu, Y., Wan, X., Li, J., Tang, S., Zhang, H., Zhuang, Y.: Anyedit: Mastering unified high-quality image editing for any idea. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference. pp. 26125–26135 (2025) 56. Zeng, Z., Hua, H., Luo, J.: Mira: Multimodal iterative reasoning agent for image editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21087 (2025) 57. Zhang, K., Mo, L., Chen, W., Sun, H., Su, Y.: Magicbrush: A manually annotated dataset for instruction-guided image editing. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems 36 , 31428–31449 (2023) 58. Zhang, K., Mo, L., Chen, W., Sun, H., Su, Y.: Magicbrush: A manually annotated dataset for instruction-guided image editing. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems 36 (2024) 59. Zhang, S., Yang, X., Feng, Y., Qin, C., Chen, C.C., Yu, N., Chen, Z., Wang, H., Savarese, S., Ermon, S., et al.: Hive: Harnessing human feedback for instructional visual editing. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 9026–9036 (2024) 60. Zhang, Y., Li, J., Tai, Y.W.: Layercraft: Enhancing text-to-image generation with cot reasoning and layered object integration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.00010 (2025) 61. Zhao, S., Xie, Z., Liu, M., Huang, J., Pang, G., Chen, F., Grover, A.: Self-distilled reasoner: On-policy self-distillation for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18734 (2026) 62. Zhenyu, W., Aoxue, L., Zhenguo, L., Xihui, L.: Genartist: Multimodal llm as an agent for unified image generation and editing. NeuRIPS (2024) 63. Zhu, D., Chen, J., Shen, X., Li, X., Elhoseiny, M.: Minigpt-4: Enhancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10592 (2023) Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 21 

## Appendix 

We provide additional qualitative results, experimental comparisons, and imple-mentation details below. 

## A Qualitative Results 

We provide step-wise editing visualizations in Tables 4, 5, and 6. These exam-ples illustrate our method’s ability to execute long sequences of diverse edits, including text changes, background modifications, and object-level alterations. Together, they demonstrate that the system can reliably compose multiple het-erogeneous edits while maintaining visual coherence and consistency with the original content. 

## B Additional Experiments 

B.1 Results on Image Editing Benchmarks 

In the main paper, we primarily reported results on a dataset consisting of com-plex multi-step advertisement editing tasks. In this section, we further evaluate our method on several widely used image editing benchmarks. Specifically, we consider the multi-turn editing setting of MagicBrush [58] as well as the single-turn editing setting introduced in GEdit-Bench [24]. 

Performance on MagicBrush The multi-turn editing setting in MagicBrush consists of a sequence of edits (typically ranging from one to three) applied to a single image. The instructions in this benchmark specify direct edits, rather than requiring high-level planning. Therefore, in this experiment we employ only our learned orchestrator and do not use the planner. Through this evaluation, we ex-amine whether the policy learned by our orchestrator—trained on advertisement editing tasks—generalizes to other commonly studied image editing scenarios. 

Baselines We compare our method against several existing agentic image edit-ing systems, including GenArtist [44], LayerCraft [60], and Talk2Image [27]. In addition to these agent-based pipelines, we also evaluate against widely used instruction-based editing models such as MagicBrush [58], HIVE [59], and In-structPix2Pix [2]. Unlike our approach, these agentic baselines do not learn a tool-selection policy from experience; instead, they rely on prompt-engineered orchestration to select the appropriate actions. 22 A. S. Rajan et al. 

Execution Result Plan 

Goal: Adapt the advertisement into a vibrant millennial-focused savings campaign while maintain-ing brand recognition. 

1: Replace the background with a vibrant gradient of orange, teal, and purple, keeping the jar of coins and plant unchanged. 

> flux kontext edit

2: Replace the text ‘Public Provident Fund (PPF) Scheme’ with ‘Start Saving Today’ in bold, modern sans-serif font, centered in the top-left area. 

> qwen image edit

3: Replace the text ‘The Scheme offers an investment avenue...’ with ‘Grow Your Future, Even While You’re Just Starting Out!’ in bold, modern sans-serif font. 

> qwen-layered (region3) + flux inpaint

8: Add a subtle glow effect around the jar of coins and plant to draw attention to them while preserving all other elements. 

> qwen image edit

9: Include a small, clean smartphone screen graphic in the bottom-right corner showing a simple savings app interface to reinforce digital accessibility. 

> qwen-layered (region1) + flux inpaint

Table 4: Example editing sequence showcasing the transition from the original advertisement to the final millennial-focused design. Our planner decomposes the task into steps, and the orchestrator carries out each step by selecting the appropriate editing tools. Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 23 

Execution Result Plan 

Goal: Adapt the advertisement into a localized version targeted at spice lovers in Mexico. 

1: Add a spicy dish on the right side of the image, plac-ing it next to the product, without altering the product or existing text. 

> qwen-bbox (region3) + flux inpaint

3: Add a small image of a traditional Mexican chili pep-per, such as a jalape˜ no or habanero, near the bottom center of the image, below the product 

> qwen-bbox (region2) + flux inpaint

4: Replace ‘chilli eating competition’ with ‘spice chal-lenge’ in the black banner while preserving design ele-ments. 

> deepseek-ocr (region4) + flux inpaint

6: Change the background to a vibrant red with sub-tle spice-themed patterns (chili outlines/smoke), keep-ing product and text in place. 

> qwen-layered (region1) + flux inpaint

7: Add bold white text ‘Perfect for Mexican Spicy Dishes’ at the top of the image, positioned above the ‘TAG A FRIEND’ headline. 

> qwen image edit

Table 5: Example editing sequence showcasing the transition from the original advertisement to a localized version targeted at spice lovers in Mexico. Our planner decomposes the task into steps, and the orchestrator carries out each step by selecting the appropriate editing tools. 24 A. S. Rajan et al. 

Execution Result Plan 

Goal: Create a healthy lifestyle version targeting fitness-conscious buyers. 

2: Change the color palette to light blue, green, and earthy tones across the entire image, including the noodles bowl, packaging, and background. 

> qwen-bbox (region1) + flux inpaint

4: Add a gym locker room background or gym setting behind the noodles bowl, without obscuring the food or packaging. 

> qwen-bbox (region2) + flux inpaint

5: Add the tagline ’Fuel Your Fitness Journey’ in bold, modern font directly below the main slogan ’Jhatpat BNAO BEFIKAR Khao’, keeping the existing font style and placement intact. 

> qwen image edit

6: Add the phrase ’Perfect for Pre-Workout Fuel’ next to the noodle bowl on the left, using the same font as the existing slogan. 

> qwen image edit

7: Replace the existing decorative elements with a sports-themed background (e.g., crossed dumbbells or a ’Grab a Pair’ prompt in front of dumbbells) to re-inforce the fitness theme.’ 

> qwen-layered (region1) + flux inpaint

Table 6: Example editing sequence showcasing the transition from the original advertisement to a healthy lifestyle focused version. Our planner decomposes the task into steps, and the orchestrator carries out each step by selecting the appropriate editing tools. Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 25 

Fig. 8: Examples from the MagicBrush benchmark. Each example shows the input image, the sequence of editing instructions, the provided ground-truth result, and the output produced by our method. While the benchmark provides a single ground-truth image for evaluation, many editing instructions can be satisfied in multiple visually valid ways. As illustrated here, our method produces edits that follow the instructions while maintaining visual coherence, but may differ from the specific appearance of the provided ground truth. This highlights a limitation of evaluation metrics that rely on similarity to a single reference image when assessing open-ended image editing tasks. 

Evaluation The MagicBrush benchmark conventionally provides five evaluation metrics. CLIP-T measures text alignment by comparing the CLIP embedding of the generated image with the CLIP embedding of the target caption. The remaining metrics—L1 distance, L2 distance, CLIP-I, and DINO—measure sim-ilarity between the generated image and a ground-truth image created by human annotators, conditioned on a target mask. However, due to the open-ended na-ture of image editing tasks, the same instruction can often be satisfied in multiple visually valid ways. We attach illustrative examples in Fig. 8. In both examples, the edits pro-duced by our method correctly follow the sequence of instructions while preserv-ing the overall scene structure. However, the resulting images differ from the single ground-truth image provided in the benchmark. For instance, in the first example, our method successfully applies strawberry glaze to the donuts, replaces the alcohol shelf with a bookshelf, and places a smiling person nearby. While the specific appearance of these elements differs from the ground truth (e.g., the exact pose of the person or the texture of the glaze), the requested transformations are clearly satisfied. Similarly, in the second example, our method correctly removes the sunglasses, replaces the glove with a wooden block, and adds a small action figure beside it. Although the precise 26 A. S. Rajan et al.          

> Baseline CLIP-T
> Instruction-based editing models
> InstructPix2Pix 0.2726 w/ MagicBrush 0.2754 HIVE 0.2673 w/ MagicBrush 0.2796
> Agentic pipelines
> GenArtist 0.3067 LayerCraft 0.3157 Talk2Image 0.3157
> Ours (k=5) 0.3256

Table 7: Performance on the MagicBrush benchmark measured using CLIP-T. Our method outperforms prior agentic approaches (GenArtist, LayerCraft, and Talk2Image) as well as instruction-based editing approaches (InstructPix2Pix, HIVE, MagicBrush). visual realization differs from the reference image, the instruction is executed faithfully. These examples highlight a limitation of metrics that rely on similarity to a single ground-truth image: multiple visually valid edits may satisfy the instruc-tion, yet still receive a lower score due to differences in appearance. As a result, such metrics may penalize correct edits that deviate from the specific reference provided in the dataset. For this reason, we focus on measuring alignment with the textual description, as captured by the CLIP-T score. 

Results We report the CLIP-T results in Table 7. Our method achieves the best performance, outperforming both prior agentic approaches and instruction-based editing models in terms of semantic alignment with the target instructions. The policy learned through experience enables our orchestrator to select the tools best suited for each task, resulting in minimal yet accurate edits to the original image. This highlights the advantage of a learning-based orchestration strategy, which allows the system to adapt tool usage based on experience rather than relying on heuristic, prompt-engineered orchestration strategies. 

Performance on GEdit In addition to multi-turn editing, we also test our orchestrator, on the GEdit benchmark [24]. This benchmark contains a series of diverse edits including background changes, object-level modifications, text editing, etc. 

Baselines We compare our method against a diverse set of instruction-guided im-age editing models, including InstructPix2Pix [2], MagicBrush [58], AnyEdit [55], Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 27                                              

> Method SC PQ Overall
> AnyEdit 3.053 5.882 2.854 Instruct-Pix2Pix 3.296 6.189 3.219 MagicBrush 4.517 6.371 4.185 UniWorld-v1 4.93 7.43 4.85 OmniGen 5.879 5.871 5.005 Gemini 2.0 (DeepMind) 6.73 6.61 6.32 OmniGen2 7.16 6.77 6.41 Step1X-Edit 7.131 6.998 6.444 BAGEL 7.36 6.83 6.52 FLUX.1 Kontext [Pro] 7.02 7.60 6.56 Step1X-Edit-v1.1 7.658 7.354 6.969 GPT Image 1 [High] 7.85 7.62 7.53 Qwen-Image Edit 8.000 7.860 7.560
> Ours 8.153 8.030 7.604

Table 8: Comprehensive results on the GEdit benchmark. SC denotes semantic consistency, PQ measures perceptual quality, and the overall score is the geo-metric mean ( √SC × PQ). Our method maintains the top position even when compared against the recent proprietary and open-source models. OmniGen [50], OmniGen2 [48], and Step1X-Edit [24] along with its improved ver-sion Step1X-Edit-v1.1. We also include several recent multimodal and image gen-eration systems capable of performing instruction-based edits, including Qwen-Image-Edit [47], UniWorld-v1 [21], Gemini 2.0 [6], BAGEL [4], FLUX.1 Kon-text [19], and GPT-Image-1 [32]. 

Evaluation We follow the evaluation protocol of GEdit, which uses VI-EScore [18]. VIEScore employs a multimodal large language model to assess the edited images along two dimensions: Semantic Consistency (SC), which mea-sures how well the output follows the instruction, and Perceptual Quality (PQ), which evaluates the visual fidelity of the edit. In addition, an overall score is re-ported as the geometric mean of these two metrics, i.e., √SC × PQ. As a strong and reliable judge, GEdit uses GPT-4.1 for evaluation, and we adopt the same setting in our experiments. 

Results We report the GEdit results in Table 8. Our method achieves the best performance across all metrics, outperforming existing baselines in terms of se-mantic consistency (SC), perceptual quality (PQ), and the overall score. These results demonstrate that the policy learned by our orchestrator generalizes ef-fectively beyond the advertisement editing tasks considered in the main paper and performs well on more general image editing benchmarks. 28 A. S. Rajan et al.   

> Comparison Gemini Preference
> Checklist Planner vs Base Qwen3-VL 70.25%

Table 9: Pairwise plan preference measured using Gemini-3-Pro. Each pair of plans is evaluated twice with reversed ordering to mitigate positional bias. 

B.2 Are Checklist-Based Plans Better? 

In this section, we investigate whether checklist-based supervision leads to higher-quality plans compared to directly generating plans with a base model. While the final edited images produced by executing these plans provide one signal of performance, they do not directly indicate which plan reflects a deeper understanding of the task itself. To study this, we compare two types of plans: (1) plans generated by our planner trained with checklist-based supervision, and (2) plans generated by a base Qwen3-VL model that is simply prompted to produce a plan for adapting the image, without being required to satisfy any explicit constraints. 

Evaluation. Evaluating the quality of plans is inherently subjective. Therefore, we rely on a strong MLLM judge, Gemini-3-Pro [7], to compare pairs of plans and select the better one. To mitigate positional bias (e.g., a tendency to favor either the first or second option in pairwise comparisons), we evaluate each pair of plans twice: once with the original ordering and once with the order reversed. The final preference score is computed by averaging the outcomes across both evaluations. 

Results. Table 9 reports the pairwise preference results. Gemini prefers the checklist-based plan over the base model plan in 70.25% of comparisons. This result suggests that checklist supervision encourages the planner to produce more coherent and task-aware editing strategies. 

B.3 GenArtist Performance on Advertisement Editing 

In the main paper, we compare our method with several agentic baselines, in-cluding Qwen Image Edit and FLUX Kontext, with an external MLLM for planning. In this section, we additionally evaluate a widely used open-source agentic editing system, GenArtist [44] on our MadVerse image-based bench-mark. Other recent agentic approaches such as X-Planner [53] and MIRA [56] do not provide publicly available implementations, making direct comparisons difficult. We therefore focus on GenArtist as the strongest reproducible baseline and evaluate it under the same experimental setting described in Sec. 4.1. We report our results in Table 10. We observe that GenArtist struggles to effectively execute the requested edits compared to our method, often resulting in signifi-cant degradation. We hypothesize that this may stem from certain tools being poorly suited for these tasks, as well as limitations in the orchestrator’s policy. Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 29          

> Method Instruction Following Identity Preservation Visual Quality
> GenArtist 1.252 1.007 1.660
> Ours 4.196 3.155 2.525

Table 10: Comparison with the agentic editing baseline GenArtist. 

Scores are averaged Gemini-3-Pro evaluations measuring instruction following, identity preservation, and visual quality. GenArtist often introduces excessive degradation to the original image while attempting edits, resulting in low scores across all metrics. In contrast, our method performs the requested edits while maintaining substantially stronger identity preservation and overall visual qual-ity. 

## C Implementation Details 

Our framework consists of three main components: (i) a Planner that decom-poses high-level editing requests into a sequence of atomic operations, (ii) a set of editing tools that perform the underlying image transformations, and (iii) an Orchestrator that selects the appropriate tool and/or spatial region to exe-cute each operation. In this section, we primarily focus on the editing tools and the orchestrator used during execution. For each component, we describe how it is constructed, trained, and used during inference. Finally, since the editing tasks we consider are open-ended, we also describe the evaluation framework used to assess instruction following, identity preservation, and visual quality. Finally, we also provide more details on our inference algorithm. 

C.1 Editing Tools 

Image editing tasks involve a wide range of transformations, from global changes such as modifying the background or color palette to localized edits such as replacing objects or modifying specific regions. No single model reliably supports all of these operations, motivating the use of multiple specialized editing tools. We therefore employ a modular toolset consisting of three categories: analy-sis tools , whole-image editing tools , and region-level editing tools . Analysis tools identify regions of interest (e.g., objects, layout elements, or semantic layers). Whole-image editing tools apply instruction-guided transformations to the entire image. Region-level editing tools instead operate on specific regions identified by the analysis tools, enabling more precise localized edits. 

Whole-Image Editing Models For global edits, we use two instruction-guided editing models: FLUX.1-Kontext-dev and Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 . Both take an input image and a textual instruction and generate a modified image that reflects the requested change while preserving the overall structure of the original image. 30 A. S. Rajan et al. 

FLUX.1-Kontext-dev and Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 are image editing models that take an input image and a textual instruction and generate an edited image consistent with the requested modification. Both models provide strong instruction-following capabilities and produce high-quality edits, but they also exhibit certain weaknesses. In particular, since edits are conditioned on the full image, modifications are not strictly spatially constrained and may unintentionally affect regions unrelated to the intended change. To address this limitation, we additionally incorporate a region-level editing pipeline that first identifies relevant regions using analysis tools and then performs targeted modifications via diffusion-based inpainting. 

Analysis Tools These tools identify editable regions in the input image that can later be modified by region-level editing models. Because different editing tasks require different forms of spatial understanding, we employ multiple com-plementary region discovery mechanisms to detect relevant areas of the image. 

Fig. 9: Region discovery using the SAM-2 + Qwen3-VL pipeline. SAM-2 first segments the image into candidate regions, which are visualized with numbered masks (left). The marked image is then provided to Qwen3-VL, which generates semantic descriptions for each region (right). These region indices and descrip-tions allow the system to reference specific parts of the image during subsequent editing steps. (i) SAM-2 + Qwen3-VL performs semantic region discovery using a Set-of-Marks representation. We first apply SAM-2 to segment the image into candidate regions and overlay numbered markers on the resulting masks [51]. The marked image is then provided to Qwen3-VL-8B, which generates a semantic description for each numbered region. This produces a structured mapping between region indices, masks, and textual descriptions, allowing the system to reference spe-cific regions during editing. Fig. 9 shows an example. We consider up to eight candidate regions, selected based on the largest area. (ii) DeepSeek-OCR performs layout and text detection, identifying bound-ing boxes corresponding to textual elements and structured layout regions. Fig. Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 31 

Fig. 10: DeepSeek-OCR identifies textual and layout elements in the image by predicting bounding boxes around text regions and structured layout compo-nents. Each detected region is assigned an index, allowing the system to refer-ence and modify specific textual elements during editing. 10 shows an example. We consider up to 10 candidate regions, selected based on the largest area. (iii) Qwen-Layered decomposes the image into a set of alpha-composable layers ordered from foreground to background, capturing larger structural com-ponents that may not correspond to individual objects. Each predicted alpha layer is converted into a binary mask by thresholding the alpha values at 128. These masks can then be used as candidate editable regions. Example layers are shown in Fig. 11. We consider four candidate regions. (iv) Qwen-BBox addresses a limitation of the previous analysis tools. While SAM-2, DeepSeek-OCR, and Qwen-Layered are effective at identifying existing objects, text, or structural components, they are not task-specific. As a result, they can fail to identify regions required for edits that involve adding new objects or modifying areas that do not correspond to clearly defined semantic entities. To address this, we use a Qwen3-VL-8B model to directly predict candidate regions conditioned on the editing instruction. However, we observed that pre-dicting absolute bounding box coordinates directly is difficult for the model. In-stead, we parameterize bounding boxes using normalized coordinates expressed as percentages of the image width and height. Even with normalized coordi-nates, the model struggles to localize regions reliably without visual references. Therefore, we overlay a grid on the image (Fig. 12, middle), which serves as a visual prompt that helps the model reason about spatial locations. Given the instruction and the grid-annotated image, the model predicts three candidate bounding boxes (Fig. 12, right). During editing, the system may choose 32 A. S. Rajan et al. 

Fig. 11: Layer-based region discovery using Qwen-Layered. Left: Original input image. Middle and Right: Example masks produced by Qwen-Layered that highlight different structural regions of the scene. These masks correspond to different alpha-composable layers that can be independently edited in subsequent region-level editing steps. 

Fig. 12: Instruction-guided region discovery using Qwen-BBox. Left: Original input image with the editing instruction. Middle: A grid overlay is added to the image, providing spatial reference cues that help the model reason about locations when predicting regions. Right: Candidate bounding boxes predicted by Qwen3-VL conditioned on the editing instruction. The model predicts three candidate regions that can be selected individually or combined during region-level editing. Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 33 

to operate on any of these individual regions or on the union of all predicted boxes. 

Region-Level Editing Tools For region-level editing, the orchestrator first selects a target region from the outputs of the analysis tools. Each analysis tool proposes candidate regions (e.g., segmentation masks or bounding boxes), from which the system chooses a single mask corresponding to the intended edit. In the case of bounding boxes we convert the box to a binary mask. Given the selected mask, we use FLUX-Kontext Inpaint , a diffusion-based editor that performs instruction-guided modifications within the specified region. The model takes as input the image, the textual instruction, and the binary mask, and generates edits that are constrained to the selected area while pre-serving the surrounding content. To provide the editing model with greater flexibility when modifying the tar-get object, we dilate the predicted mask by 100 pixels before applying inpainting. Expanding the mask allows the model to adjust the size, shape, or surrounding context of the edited region, rather than being strictly constrained to the original mask boundary. The masked region is then edited according to the instruction, while pixels outside the mask remain unchanged. This region-level editing mechanism enables precise localized modifications that are difficult to achieve with whole-image editing models alone. 

C.2 Orchestrator Details 

Given the input image and editing instruction, the orchestrator selects the next action by producing a structured tool call. Each action is represented as a JSON object of the form 

{"tool" : t, "arguments" : a},

where t denotes the selected tool and a contains any required parameters. At each step, the orchestrator can choose between two types of actions: invok-ing an analysis tool or directly applying a whole-image editing tool . If a whole-image editing tool is selected, the model performs the requested modification across the entire image. If an analysis tool is selected, the tool returns a set of candidate regions (e.g., segmentation masks or bounding boxes). These regions are then made available to the orchestrator, which subsequently selects one of them when invoking a region-level editing tool. In this case, the tool call includes both the editing instruction and the index of the region to be modified. For example, a region-level edit is represented as 

{"tool": "flux_inpaint", "arguments": {"region_number": 3} }34 A. S. Rajan et al. 

Reward Model Since the editing tasks we consider are open-ended and do not have a single fixed ground-truth target, it is difficult to directly determine whether a generated edit successfully satisfies the instruction. Therefore, we require a signal that evaluates the quality of candidate edits and allows the system to identify which tool execution performs best. As discussed in the main paper, we pre-compute the outputs of candidate tool calls and use a reward model to score each resulting edit. The orchestrator is then trained to select the tool which yielded the highest reward. Existing reward models such as EditScore [26] and EditReward [49] are pri-marily designed for natural image editing and do not fully capture the require-ments of other kinds of images e.g., advertisement-style edits. Therefore, we design a custom evaluation rubric based on three criteria: instruction execution ,

identity preservation , and visual quality . The rubric used by the evaluator is shown below. 

CRITERION 1: INSTRUCTION EXECUTION Question: 

Did the edited image correctly and completely execute the requested instruc-tion? 

Scoring (0–5): 

0: No attempt / wrong task: The instruction was not executed at all, or a completely unrelated edit was performed. The new advertisement does not actually advertise what the user intended to advertise. 1: Attempted but ineffective: The model made a relevant attempt (e.g., tried to change the text or background as instructed), but it did not succeed in completely executing any part of the instruction. 2: Partial but meaningful: At least one major part of the instruction is executed correctly, but other parts are missing or wrong. 3: Mostly right, clearly flawed: Mostly correct, but some part of the instruction has been completely misinterpreted. Such as text is placed below instead of above. 4: Complete with minor issues: All requested changes are present and rec-ognizable, but with small imperfections—e.g., slightly off colors, minor typos (”Summmer” instead of ”Summer”), or incorrect font/texture. 5: Perfect execution: The instruction is executed exactly as requested with no errors or ambiguities. 

IMPORTANT: 

Evaluate ONLY instruction execution here. Ignore aesthetics unless they pre-vent instruction execution. Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 35 

CRITERION 2: IDENTITY PRESERVATION Question: 

Did the edit preserve all parts of the original image that were NOT explicitly requested to change? 

Scoring (0–5): 

0: Catastrophic over-editing: The edit has completely destroyed the original layout and composition of the image, the new image does not preserve anything from the original image. 1: Significant over-editing: The edited image retains some parts of the origi-nal image, but the new layout is still extremely different, such as unnecessary zooming into the product or removing the background. 2: Moderate over-editing: The layout is mostly preserved, but few elements such as important objects, or critically important informative text boxes have been changed unnecessarily. 3: Minor over-editing: Small, yet noticeable changes, such as removing less important object/label or adding a new one. Performing add instead of modify etc. 4: Negligible over-editing: Subtle artifacts, such as different outline color, or minor color/texture changes. 5: Perfect preservation: Nothing has been unnecessarily changed. 36 A. S. Rajan et al. 

CRITERION 3: VISUAL QUALITY Question: 

Does this image have good visual quality and aesthetics for use as an adver-tisement? 

Scoring (0–5): 

0: Aesthetically broken: All regions of the image are visually unpleasant or chaotic (e.g., severe artifacts, incoherent composition, unreadable text, clashing elements). It does not function as a usable advertisement. 1: Poor aesthetics: Not all parts, but majority of the image has major qual-ity issues—heavy blurring, over-saturation, or distortion that makes it look unprofessional. 2: Weak aesthetics: Important regions suffer from noticeable quality is-sues—blurring, over-saturation, warping, or cluttered placement/overlapping text regions—that make the ad look amateurish. Otherwise the image looks acceptable. 3: Acceptable aesthetics: The image is usable but has style issues—low-quality textures, fonts that look out of place, layout is not nice on the eye etc. 4: Good aesthetics: Visually pleasing and well-composed overall, with only mi-nor aesthetic imperfections, such as text which is slightly garbled or objects which slightly overlap. 5: Excellent aesthetics: Highly polished, visually harmonious, and professionally composed. All elements work together cleanly and attractively as a high-quality advertisement. None of the components objectively detract from the overall visual appeal. 

To compute these scores, we use GPT-5 as a strong judge to evaluate the edited images according to the defined criteria. Finally, we aggregate the three criterion scores into a single scalar reward. Let IE, IP, and VQ denote the scores for Instruction Execution, Identity Preservation, and Visual Quality respectively. Rather than summing the scores, which would allow a high score in one dimen-sion to compensate for poor performance in another, we compute the geometric mean of the three scores: 

R = (IE · IP · VQ) 1/3.

This formulation encourages balanced performance across all criteria, since a low score in any single dimension significantly reduces the overall reward. Further-more, many of the editing tools used in our pipeline (e.g., diffusion-based models) are inherently stochastic and may produce different outputs for the same input due to sampling noise. To reduce the variance, we generate two outputs for each tool invocation. The reward for a given tool selection is then computed as the average reward across these two outputs. Now we have a dataset where we have precomputed the tool output for every instruction given the original image on the training set and we have scored them, therefore we know which tools have the highest reward and can train on them. Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 37 

Reward Model for Inference During inference, verification is critical to avoid selecting a poor editing action that could negatively affect subsequent steps in the editing process. Since the orchestrator considers multiple candidate tool executions, we require a reward model to evaluate the resulting edits and select the most desirable outcome. Although the rubric described above can be evaluated using a strong closed-source judge, relying on such models during inference would be computationally expensive. To keep inference costs manageable, we instead distill this evaluation signal into a lightweight open-source reward model. Specifically, we use Qwen3-VL-8B as the backbone and train separate clas-sification heads to predict the evaluation scores for each criterion. Each head predicts the score distribution for one of the three axes—Instruction Execution (IE), Identity Preservation (IP), and Visual Quality (VQ)—using supervision derived from the judge’s scores for each tool execution. This allows the model to approximate the behavior of the original evaluator while remaining efficient enough for use during inference. During inference, the reward model outputs logits over the possible score levels for each criterion. These logits are converted into probabilities using a softmax, and the expected score for each criterion is computed by weighting the possible score values by their predicted probabilities. Formally, if zc,k denotes the logit corresponding to score level k ∈ { 1, . . . , 5} for criterion c ∈ { IE , IP , VQ },the expected score is computed as 

ˆsc =

> 5

X

> k=0

k · softmax( zc)k.

The final reward is then obtained by aggregating the predicted scores using the same geometric mean formulation used during training: 

R = (ˆ sIE · ˆsIP · ˆsVQ )1/3.

C.3 Evaluation 

Open-ended image editing, and in particular advertisement editing, has not been studied in detail by prior work. Therefore, we need to design a comprehensive measure of success. In the paper, we report results in the main section 4.1 of experiments as well as the ablations in section 4.2. In addition, we also compare the two plans in Section B.2. In this section, we provide the details of each of these evaluations. 

Whole-Edit Evaluation We aim to evaluate both the quality of the generated plan and the correctness of its execution by assessing the final edited image. To do so, we require a metric that captures both the reasoning and knowledge demonstrated by the planner when determining the required modifications, as well as the system’s ability to faithfully execute those modifications and produce a high-quality image that remains semantically consistent with the user’s request. 38 A. S. Rajan et al. 

To this end, we evaluate edits along three axes: Instruction Execution , Iden-tity Preservation , and Visual Quality . The judgement is conditioned on the ini-tial image, the final edited image, and the high-level task description. Since we trained our model using GPT based rewards, in order to remove any potential bias in evaluation, we use Gemini-3-Pro [7] as a judge here. For Instruction Execution we use the following rubric to score the edits: 

Instruction Execution (IE) System Instruction: You are an expert evaluator for image editing quality with a focus on 

instruction execution . Your task is to determine how accurately the requested edit has been carried out in the edited image. 

Evaluation Description: The model must do two things: (1) identify what should change in the original image to achieve the requested theme, and (2) correctly execute those changes. Scor-ing considers intent (correct understanding of what must change), coverage (whether sufficient changes are made to convey the theme), and execution (whether those changes are implemented correctly). Compare the original image with the edited image and determine whether the intended transformation has been properly realized. 

Scoring Guide 1 — Very Poor: Intent is incorrect. The instruction is misunderstood and the requested trans-formation is not meaningfully reflected (e.g., unrelated edits or changing the subject). 

2 — Below Average: Intent is roughly correct but execution is poor, contradictory, or incorrect. Alternatively, execution may be reasonable but the edits are too minimal to convey the requested theme. 

3 — Acceptable: Intent and coverage are reasonable, but execution contains several flaws. Multiple sub-edits may be inconsistent or visually incorrect. 

4 — Good: Intent and coverage are good and execution is mostly correct. Minor imperfections may exist, but the overall transformation clearly reflects the instruction. 

5 — Excellent: Intent is precise, coverage is complete, and execution is correct throughout. All necessary edits are applied and the resulting image fully conveys the requested transformation. 

With this rubric, we observe that the judge model evaluates the edit based on both the knowledge demonstrated as well as the success of execution. In order to measure Identity Preservation , we use the following rubric: 

Identity Preservation (IP) System Instruction: You are an expert evaluator for image editing quality with a focus on 

identity preservation . Your task is to evaluate how well the edited image preserves the core identity and non-target content of the input image. 

Evaluation Description: Identity preservation measures how well the edited image maintains the core identity and non-target content from the input image while allowing necessary attribute changes required by the editing instruction. Acceptable modifications may include changes to color, texture, background, style, or other properties when they are explicitly required to follow the instruction. Changes that go beyond what is necessary, introduce unintended drift, or alter unrelated elements of the image should reduce the score. 

Scoring Guide 1 — Very Poor: Core identity is heavily altered or unrecognizable compared to the input image. Major non-target content is changed without justification. Extensive unintended modifications or over-editing are present. 

2 — Below Average: Significant identity drift beyond what is required by the instruction. Multiple unnecessary changes to attributes, structure, or background. Edits exceed what is needed to satisfy the instruction. 

3 — Acceptable: Core identity is mostly preserved and required attribute changes are applied, but there is noticeable drift in some structural elements or non-target regions beyond what the instruction necessitates. 

4 — Good: Core identity and non-target content are well preserved. Attribute changes (e.g., color, texture, background) are applied only when justified by the instruction. Minor unintended drift or slight over-editing may be present. 

5 — Excellent: Core identity is faithfully preserved relative to the input image. Only the modifi-cations necessary to fulfill the instruction are applied, and unrelated content remains unchanged. Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 39 

And for visual quality, we only take in the final image as input (it is inde-pendent of either the instruction or the initial image) and evaluate the quality based on the following rubric: 

Visual Quality (VQ) System Instruction: You are an expert evaluator for image editing quality with a focus on 

visual quality . Your task is to evaluate the overall visual quality, coherence, and artifact level of the edited image. 

Evaluation Description: Visual quality measures how clearly and professionally the edited im-age presents information while remaining free from artifacts, distortions, or rendering errors. The image should appear polished and visually coherent, with edited regions integrated naturally with the rest of the image. Quality issues such as blurriness, broken structure, layout inconsistencies, or rendering artifacts should reduce the score. 

Scoring Guide 1 — Very Poor: Severe artifacts, distortions, broken anatomy or structure, or major rendering failures. Strong blurriness. Text is completely garbled, blurred, or unreadable and conveys no information. Layout is unusable and information is effectively lost due to quality issues. 

2 — Below Average: Obvious artifacts (e.g., warped regions, visible overlaps) affecting impor-tant objects or regions. Text has issues in every block and important information is not clearly conveyed. Typos may obscure meaning. Major objects may overlap incorrectly. Visual flaws sig-nificantly reduce usability. 

3 — Acceptable: Generally usable image quality, but noticeable issues such as mild artifacts, slight blur, or weak integration between edited and original regions. Textures and text are mostly correct but may show minor distortions or typos. Color, font, or layout consistency may be poor. The image appears amateurish but information remains understandable. 

4 — Good: Clean and coherent image with minor imperfections. Textures and edited regions blend well with the original content. Text is readable and correctly placed but may have minor stylistic issues (e.g., color inconsistencies or symmetry problems). Some imperfections in lighting, perspective, or design choices may remain. 

5 — Excellent: High-fidelity, sharp, and visually coherent image. Lighting and shadows are natural and consistent. No visible artifacts, distortions, blur, or rendering errors. Edited content is seamlessly integrated with the original image. Text is crisp, readable, and free of overlap or distortion. 

This allows us to compare methods under a common high-level instruction while different techniques attempt to solve the task using different strategies. 

Plan-Conditioned Evaluation In the ablation studies presented in the main paper, we compared several components of our method while keeping the under-lying plan fixed. The goal of this experiment is to determine whether, given the same plan, the combination of editing tools and a learned orchestration policy leads to improved performance. Under this setting, evaluating instruction execution and identity preservation becomes more specific. In addition to assessing whether the overall task is ad-dressed, we must also evaluate whether the resulting edits follow the plan itself. To enable this, we rely on a dense checklist derived from the plan. Concretely, given the input image, the high-level instruction, and the multi-step plan, we use a strong MLLM to generate a dense checklist describing the criteria that the edited image should satisfy. The checklist enumerates specific concepts that should be modified, preserved, added, or removed, as well as im-portant relationships between objects in the scene that should remain consistent with the plan. During evaluation, we again use Gemini-3-Pro [7]. The judge receives the original image, the high-level task, the edited image, and the generated checklist, and determines whether each checklist item is satisfied or not. The final score 40 A. S. Rajan et al. 

for an image is computed as the fraction of checklist items that are satisfied. We then average these scores across the dataset to obtain the reported results. 

Checklist Generation In order to generate the checklist, we use the following system prompt: 

Checklist Specification Generator Prompt System Instruction: You are a specification generator for image editing tasks. Your goal is to produce a final-state constraint list describing what must be true after all edits are completed. 

Inputs: – Input image 

– Task description 

– Step-by-step editing plan 

Output Format: Return a valid Python list of strings. Each string must represent exactly one atomic final-state constraint . Use the following prefixes: 

– Preserve: – Remove: – Replace: – Add: – Constraint: Rules: – Analyze the input image to identify salient and structurally important elements. 

– If an important element is not modified by the plan , include a Preserve constraint. 

– For replacements, use the format: Replace: <original> -> <new> .

– Use Remove only when an element must explicitly disappear. 

– Use Add only for new elements introduced by the plan (include placement or attributes when relevant). 

– Use Constraint only when the plan specifies positional, visibility, or relational requirements (e.g., top-right corner, left of product, below logo). 

– Do not include aesthetic or realism requirements unless explicitly stated in the plan. 

– If multiple valid realizations exist, include all possible outcomes. 

– Each list entry must represent exactly one atomic execution condition .

– Be concise. 

– No explanations. 

– No markdown. 

– Output only the Python list. 

Example 

Image contains: 

– Product pack 

– Brand logo 

– Blue background 

– Wooden surface Plan: 1. Replace background with a festive Diwali scene 2. Add fireworks Output: 

["Preserve: product pack design", "Preserve: brand logo", "Preserve: wooden surface", "Replace: background -> Diwali festive scene", "Add: fireworks" ]Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 41 

This prompt helps us to generate a dense checklist. Now we use this dense checklist to score the final edit. The system prompt for that is: 

Checklist Verification Prompt System Instruction: You are a strict evaluator for image editing execution. Your task is to determine whether the edited image satisfies each constraint in a provided checklist. 

Inputs: – Original (input) image 

– Editing task / instruction 

– Checklist of final-state constraints 

– Edited (output) image 

Checklist Format: Each checklist item begins with one of the following prefixes: 

– Preserve: – Remove: – Replace: – Add: – Constraint: Evaluation Rules: – Preserve: Mark Y if the referenced element remains present and meaningfully unchanged. Mark N if it is altered, removed, or obscured. 

– Remove: Mark Y if the element is no longer visible. Mark N if it still appears. 

– Replace: Mark Y only if the original element is gone and the specified new element is present. Otherwise mark N. 

– Add: Mark Y if the specified new element clearly exists. Mark N if it is missing or incorrect. 

– Constraint: Mark Y if the stated positional, relational, or visibility condition is satisfied. Otherwise mark N. 

General Guidelines: – Judge strictly based on visible evidence in the edited image. 

– Do not assume intent or infer missing details. 

– If the result is unclear or ambiguous, mark N. 

– Ignore aesthetic quality unless it is explicitly part of the constraint. 

– Provide only a very short justification phrase (e.g., “logo still visible”, “background changed”, “color incorrect”). 

Output Format: Return a JSON array where each checklist item corresponds to one entry containing a short reason and a binary result. 

[{ "reason": "<short reason>", "result": "Y" }, { "reason": "<short reason>", "result": "N" }, ... ]

Output only the JSON array and no additional text. 

For visual quality, we use the same evaluation as we discussed in section C.3. 

Plan Comparison In order to perform the evaluation in section B.2. We use the following prompt: 42 A. S. Rajan et al. 

Plan Preference Evaluation Prompt System Instruction: You are an expert evaluator of image editing plans. Your task is to compare two candidate plans and determine which one better solves the given editing task. 

Inputs: – Input image 

– Editing task / instruction 

– Plan A 

– Plan B 

Evaluation Criteria: Choose the plan that demonstrates stronger understanding of the image and the editing task. 

Strong plans typically: – correctly identify the important elements in the image that must be modified 

– recognize which elements should be preserved 

– demonstrate practical knowledge of how edits would realistically be executed 

– propose non-trivial yet practical changes that lead to a meaningful edit 

– provide clear and direct instructions with minimal ambiguity 

Weak plans often: – give generic instructions without understanding the structure of the image 

– rely on vague wording indicating limited knowledge of the task 

– suggest trivial changes that do not meaningfully improve the image 

– contain vague steps (e.g., “update the text” without specifying how) 

Plan Consistency Rules: – Plans are sequential; later steps operate on the result of earlier steps. 

– Early steps should not remove or modify elements in a way that makes later steps impossible. 

– Intermediate steps need not make sense in isolation, only within the overall plan. 

Output Format: First briefly explain your reasoning (2–4 sentences) referencing specific steps or phrases from the plans. Then output the final choice as JSON. 

{"reasoning": "<brief reasoning>", "choice": "A" or "B" }

C.4 Inference through Tree Search 

Each tool invocation is represented using a structured format 

{"tool" : t, "arguments" : a},

where t denotes the tool name and a specifies the corresponding arguments (e.g., region selection). This representation mirrors the execution interface of our editing framework, allowing predicted tool calls to be directly executed without requiring the model to generate intermediate code. Importantly, this structured representation also defines a discrete and enu-merable space of candidate actions. In typical tool-calling setups where the model generates free-form code or API calls, the output space is effectively unbounded, making it difficult to evaluate likelihoods over all possible actions. In contrast, our formulation specifies a finite set of candidate tool–region pairs ( a, r ) ∈ C for each sub-task. This allows us to explicitly evaluate how likely the orchestrator considers each candidate action. Learning to Plan and Orchestrate for Open-Ended Image Editing 43 

Algorithm 1: Reward-Guided Tool Selection 

Input: Input image x, plan P = {s1, . . . , s T }, orchestrator πϕ, reward model 

R, candidate tool–region set C, beam size K

Output: Edited image ˆ x

ˆx ← x

for each sub-task st ∈ P do for each candidate (a, r ) ∈ C do 

Let ya,r = ( y1, . . . , y L) be the token sequence for ( a, r ); score a,r ← 1

> L

PLi=1 log πϕ(yi | ˆx, s t, y <i ); 

Bt ← TopK (a,r )∈C (score a,r , K ); 

for each (a, r ) ∈ B t do 

˜xa,r ← fa,r (ˆ x); 

Ra,r ← R(˜ xa,r , x ); (at, r t) ← arg max (a,r )∈B t Ra,r ;ˆx ← fat,r t (ˆ x); 

return ˆx

Let ya,r = ( y1, . . . , y L) denote the token sequence corresponding to a candi-date tool invocation. For each candidate action we compute a length-normalized log-likelihood score under the orchestrator policy πϕ:

score a,r = 1

L

> L

X

> i=1

log πϕ(yi | ˆx, s t, y <i ).

This quantity corresponds to the average token log-likelihood (equivalently, the negative log-perplexity up to a constant) assigned by the orchestrator to the candidate action. Because the candidate action space is explicitly enumerated, the orchestrator can score and rank all possible tool selections in this manner. These scores are then used to select the most promising candidate actions, which are executed and evaluated by the reward model as described in Algo-rithm 1.