Title: Fusing Transferred Priors and Physics-based Decomposition for Underwater Image Enhancement

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.15648v1

Published Time: Tue, 16 Jun 2026 01:21:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Fusing Transferred Priors and Physics-based Decomposition for Underwater Image Enhancement 

## Haochen Hu a, Yanrui Bin a, Zhengyan Zhang a, Minchen Wei a, Chih-yung Wen a and Bing Wang a,∗

> a

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR 

A R T I C L E I N F O 

Keywords :Underwater Image Enhancement Underwater Image Formation Model Diffusion Models Transfer Learning 

A B S T R A C T 

The underwater images are captured within diverse water-medium conditions, leading to complex degradation, including color bias, low contrast, and blur effect. Recently, learning-based methods have demonstrated their potential for underwater image enhancement (UIE). However, most of the previous work focus on the training strategy or network design to make the enhanced result aligned well with the labels in datasets, ignoring that the labels are selected from the enhanced results of previous UIE methods and these pseudo-labels are noisy. Consequently, the performance of their models is not satisfactory to a certain extent. However, collecting the true labels of the underwater images is challenging. In this work, we propose a transfer learning-based UIE that does not require underwater images to have paired noisy or true labels for learning. Instead, the UIE task is first divided into global color correction, haze removal, and background noise suppression following the underwater physics. Then multiple types of prior from other vision tasks are leveraged as cross-domain supervision in each step. In this way, a novel UIE is available via transfer learning, and the physics-aligned UIE decomposition provides theoretical soundness. Qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate that our proposal based on physics and priors fusion achieves SOTA performance in the UIE task and effectively boosts downstream vision tasks, significantly outperforming benchmark methods. Project repo: https://github.com/Haru2022/P2-UIE .

## 1. Introduction 

Underwater vision is essential for advancing marine biology research, enhancing underwater navigation systems, and improving the safety and efficiency of underwater con-struction and exploration activities. However, it is always degraded because of the water medium. Due to the apparent optical properties inherent to water bodies [9], light beams passing through the water suffer absorption and scattering, resulting in color bias, low contrast, and blur effects in the final underwater images. The degradation of underwater images complicates the execution of many visual algorithms [6, 23, 54], which rely heavily on clear visual features or the correct color appearance, such as feature matching, edge detection, and saliency detection. Consequently, improving the quality of underwater images has attracted significant attention from computer vision communities. Numerous al-gorithms have been proposed over the past decade, achiev-ing substantial progress. Among them, learning methods [14, 22, 49, 5, 26, 33, 35, 31, 45, 13] have demonstrated superiority over traditional handcrafted methods [7, 52]. Although much progress has been made with learning-based methods, the issue of performance degradation in-duced by biased datasets is still left to further research. Most of the recent learning-based methods are mainly based on supervised learning, which means the true label of degraded underwater images is needed. However, as it is not feasible to collect the ground truth of the underwater images by 

> ∗

Corresponding author  

> haru-haochen.hu@connect.polyu.hk

(H. Hu); binyanrui@gmail.com 

(Y. Bin); sam-zhenyan.zhang@connect.polyu.hk (Z. Zhang);  

> minchen.wei@polyu.edu.hk

(M. Wei); cywen@polyu.edu.hk (C. Wen);  

> bingwang@polyu.edu.hk

(B. Wang) 

> ORCID

(s): 

removing the water to capture images from the same per-spective, the paired underwater datasets are always collected by manually selecting the labels from the previous work. For example, UIEB [22] and LSUI [34] are two widely used paired datasets. To collect the label of raw underwater images, the authors first perform image enhancement using various previously proposed UIEs and then select the im-ages with the best quality as corresponding labels. Quality evaluation is based on subjective scores of human volun-teers. Although this strategy could integrate the abilities of different UIE methods to form a relatively reliable dataset, many labels still have weak quality, with almost unchanged degradation such as color bias and low contrast, as shown in Fig.1. These pseudo-labels will mislead the UIE models and cause performance degradation. Nevertheless, there are few works that have focused on improving the quality of labels in underwater datasets in recent years, but pay too much attention to training strategy or network design to align well with labels. Some methods [14, 21, 13, 55] try to 1) introduce unsupervised contrast learning to use unpaired underwater images for training; 2) take image quality assessment (IQA) as a quantitative index to guide the model training; 3) use a fully synthetic dataset with ground truth for training, but all with limited per-formance improvement. Recently, related vision tasks have also seen advances in graph-based modeling[24], visual-textual mutual guidance[25], tensorized clustering[44, 43], and cross-modality modulation[32], although these methods are not directly designed for underwater image enhancement. In this work, we propose a new UIE method based on physics-aligned transfer learning. This solution does not re-quire unbiased true labels of underwater images for training, but still achieves a significant performance improvement. 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 1 of 20 

> arXiv:2606.15648v1 [cs.CV] 14 Jun 2026 Short Title of the Article

Raw Images 

Noisy Labels 

Ours  

> Figure 1: Example of the noisy labels in the previous paired dataset UIEB[22]. The first, second, and third row are the raw underwater images, labels in UIEB that still suffer low contrast and color bias, and the enhanced results of ours, respectively.

The whole process is as follows: according to the Under-water Image Formation Model (UIFM), we first design a physics-based decomposition strategy, where the UIE is divided into global color correction, hazy removal, and background noise suppression. For global color correction, the diffusion prior embedded in the pre-trained diffusion model narrows the synthetic-to-real gap and consequently enables good performance on real-world images. In particu-lar, the depth-related color bias is designed to degrade as two different constant values in the foreground and background regions. This setting, different from previous work, helps to further reduce the synthetic-real discrepancy. The under-water images processed by the first step will have roughly correct color pattern but show a hazy pattern. This is because the global-consistent color bias setting only helps to convert the channel-wise degradation into channel-irrelative degra-dation. According to UIFM, this residual of depth-related degradation is very similar to the atmosphere scattering model [27] that causes hazy images. Therefore, a paired real-world haze dataset [1] is utilized as the data prior to the removal of the residual effect. The real-world dense-hazy distribution would guide the model to eliminate the remaining hazy effect to get a realistic and clear foreground. Nevertheless, the background parts of processed images after hazy removal are always noisy because of the paradox between dense haze for high contrast and expected smooth background, which often makes the whole image visually unnatural. To further improve the quality of the enhance-ment, an additional step of background noise suppression is implemented based on the knowledge embedded in the semantic model [37, 40], where the possible smooth and ideal background of images after global color correction is segmented and fused with the foreground part of the corre-sponding images after hazy removal. In this way, the final enhanced results will have a contrast-enhanced foreground part and a smooth (instead of noisy) background part, which meet the criteria of high-quality images. Full UIE Multiple Priors from           

> Other Vision Tasks
> Supervised by
> Noisy Labels
> Underwater
> Images
> Transfer Learning
> for Enhancement
> Cross-Domain Supervision
> Previous Ours
> Physics-based UIE
> Decomposition
> Figure 2: The Concept of our proposal. Instead of supervised learning by noisy labels, we resort to knowledge from relevant research fields for transfer learning via physics-based task decomposition.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that multiple priors from relevant vision tasks are utilized for the cross-supervision of UIE. This transfer learning-based strategy as shown in Fig.2 provides a new perspective of the UIE solution that could avoid challenging label collection and the adversarial effect of noisy pseudo-label, but still can produce enhanced images that are much better than those of previous work. We think this is highly valuable. In addition, the proposed physical-aligned UIE decomposition strategy also ensures theoretical soundness, making each step and the corresponding fine-tuned model focus on the local enhance-ment to ease the learning difficulty. This general physics-based transfer learning cooperatively ensures the superior performance of the proposed P2UIE. In summary, our main contributions are as follows. 

• An underwater image enhancement framework is de-signed that does not require paired labels of underwa-ter image for learning, but still with high performance.   

> First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 2 of 20 Short Title of the Article

• For the first time, a transfer learning-based strategy is proposed to leverage multiple priors from relevant vision tasks for cross-domain supervision. This strat-egy avoids the adverse effect of heavily noisy pseudo-labels as well as the challenging collection of real-world accurate labels of the underwater images. 

• A physics-based UIE decomposition strategy is also developed to provide theoretical soundness, so a sat-isfactory result is ensured. 

• We evaluated the proposed P2UIE on different datasets and performed a comprehensive analysis of the results quantitatively and qualitatively, demonstrating that P2UIE significantly outperforms other methods. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. Underwater Image Formation Model 

The optical properties of water bodies are determined by two factors: intrinsic optical properties (IOPs) and apparent optical properties (AOPs) [9]. Together, IOPs and AOPs control how light behaves as it moves through water. For example, when a beam of light enters a given volume of water, it splits into three components: One portion is scat-tered in multiple directions, another is absorbed by the water, and the rest continues to travel through. Compared to the original beam, the transmitted light loses energy because of both scattering and absorption. The Underwater Image Formation Models (UIFMs) are all based on the above theory. McGlamery and Jaffe’s model [30, 16] proposed that in underwater environments, the incident light, whether from a light source or a certain point of an object surface, consists of two main components: direct light and forward-scattered light from nearby regions, assuming small-angle scattering. As a result, the total light energy 𝐸 𝑇 captured by an imaging sensor is composed of three parts: 𝐸 𝑑 , the direct light coming from the object surface; 𝐸 𝑓 𝑠 the object-related forward scattering; and 𝐸 𝑏𝑠 , the background scattering light originating from the surrounding water: 

𝐸 𝑇 = 𝐸 𝑑 + 𝐸 𝑓 𝑠 + 𝐸 𝑏𝑠 . (1) Schechner and Karpel [39] extended the model to a widely referenced version of the UIFM definition as: 

𝐼 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 𝑒 𝑓 (𝜆,𝑧 )(𝐿 𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 (𝜆 ) + 𝐿 𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 (𝜆 ) ∗ 𝑔 𝑧 ) + 𝐵, (2) where 𝜆 denotes the spectrum, with 𝜆 ∈ {𝑅, 𝐺, 𝐵 } if the spectrum is discretized. z is the object-to-sensor depth. 

𝑒 𝑓 (𝜆,𝑧 ) represents the attenuation of light intensity due to absorption and scattering, where 𝑓 < 0. 𝐿 𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 and 𝐼 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 are the unattenuated signal and the final underwater image cap-tured by the sensor, respectively. 𝑔 𝑧 is a point spread func-tion representing the depth-related forward-scattering ef-fect. The final term 𝐵 denotes background scattering (back-scattering), which is also depth-related: 

𝐵 = 𝐵 ∞(1 − 𝑒 𝑓 (𝜆,𝑧 )). (3) 

𝐵 ∞ is the veiling light that is the accumulated back-scattering from the infinity background to the sensor. For a given water medium parameter, 𝐵 ∞ is constant. In [4], the final captured underwater image 𝐼 𝑢𝑤 𝜆 (𝑥 ) is formulated as: 

𝐼 𝑢𝑤 𝜆 (𝑥 ) = 𝐽 𝜆 (𝑥 ) ⋅ 𝑡 𝜆 (𝑥 ) + 𝐵 𝜆 (1 − 𝑡 𝜆 (𝑥 )) , (4) where 𝐽 𝜆 (𝑥 ) is the scene radiance at a point 𝑥 , 𝐵 𝜆 is the veiling light, and 𝜆 means the three discrete color channels. 

𝑡 𝜆 (𝑥 ) is the residual energy ratio that denotes the degree of attenuation. It describes the ratio of the residual energy of a light beam reaching the camera and the initial energy of the light beam starting from the object: 

𝑡 𝜆 (𝑥 ) = 𝐸 residual  

> 𝜆

(𝑥 )

𝐸 initial  

> 𝜆

(𝑥 ) = 10 −𝛽 (𝜆 )𝑑 (𝑥 ) = Nrer 𝑑 (𝑥 ) 

> 𝜆

, (5) where 𝑑 (𝑥 ) is the object-to-camera depth, and Nrer 𝜆 ∈ (0 , 1) 

(Normalized Residual Energy Ratio) is a constant under a given water condition representing the intrinsic properties of the water medium. Note that the scene radiance 𝐽 𝜆 (𝑥 ) has already been attenuated by the water in the vertical direction from the surface of the water to the object. Thus, 𝐽 𝜆 (𝑥 ) can be rewritten as: 

𝐽 𝜆 (𝑥 ) = 𝐼 𝑎𝑖𝑟 𝜆 (𝑥 ) ⋅ Nrer 𝐷 (𝑥 ) 

> 𝜆

, (6) where 𝐼 𝑎𝑖𝑟 𝜆 (𝑥 ) is the scene radiance captured in the air and 

𝐷 (𝑥 ) is the depth from the water surface to the object, respectively. Thus, according to the formulas 4, 5, 6, the final UIFM is: 

𝐼 𝑢𝑤 𝜆 (𝑥 ) =( 𝐼 𝑎𝑖𝑟 𝜆 (𝑥 ) ⋅ Nrer 𝐷 (𝑥 ) 

> 𝜆

) ⋅ Nrer 𝑑 (𝑥 ) 

> 𝜆

+ 𝐵 𝜆 (1 − Nrer 𝑑 (𝑥 ) 

> 𝜆

)=𝐼 𝑎𝑖𝑟 𝜆 (𝑥 ) ⋅ Nrer 𝐷 (𝑥 )+ 𝑑 (𝑥 ) 

> 𝜆

+ 𝐵 𝜆 (1 − Nrer 𝑑 (𝑥 ) 

> 𝜆

).

(7) In summary, underwater images suffer from two main degradations: First, the channel-wise energy decay causes the color bias, which makes the images blue or green; second, a low contrast exists in many images because of the attenuated direct signal and the added scattering effect (dominated by the back-scattering). 

2.2. Underwater Image Enhancement Methods 

Image enhancement and restoration problems have long received significant attention from the community [18, 17, 47]as has the UIE problem. The UIE starts with hand-crafted methods. For example, white balance, histogram equalization, and the Gray-world assumption are some sim-ple enhancement techniques. Recently, [52, 56] have been proposed based on retinex or color space theory. In MMLE [52], images are decomposed into LAB color space where the reflectance component is sharpened while the illumi-nation part is adjusted for contrast enhancement and color correction simultaneously, therefore achieving competitive results. However, hand-crafted methods require complex parameter design and struggle to extract knowledge from   

> First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 3 of 20 Short Title of the Article

data. As a result, they have been gradually replaced by learning-based approaches. Learning-based methods instead aim to solve the UIE problem in a data-driven manner. For physics-decoupling methods, water effects based on UIFM are estimated and decoupled to get target images, such as channel-wise atten-uation coefficients, the veiling light, and the scene depth map [11, 5, 31]. Among them, PUGAN [5] designs a Par-subnet to estimate physical parameters including depth map and attenuation coefficient. Together with the adversarial learning and degradation quantization module, the enhanced result is acceptable. Similarly, DPF-Net [31] also proposes a Degraded Parameters Estimation Module (DPEM) to guide the Physical Feature Generation Module (PFGM) for the following Feature Fusion. Non-physics decoupling methods are often developed to solve the problem in an end-to-end manner, focusing on new training strategies or network designs that can better extract the knowledge embedded in underwater image datasets where the raw underwater images and the corresponding enhanced images are paired for training [14, 55, 35, 26, 33, 13]. HCLR [55] proposes to utilize hybrid contrastive learning regularization to move the enhanced image closer to the clear image, and CCL [26] designs a cascade contrast learning strategy. WF-DIff [53] considers the UIE in the form of frequency analysis and processing. SS-UIE [33] and CE-VAE [35] are mainly involved in the new network development. Although much progress has been achieved with learning-based methods, little attention has been paid to the critical issue that there are a considerable number of images with noisy labels in the real-world paired datasets. Take two widely used paired datasets, LSUI [34] and UIEB [22], as examples: in these two datasets, the authors first enhanced the raw underwater images using several previous UIE methods. The enhanced candidates for each raw underwater image are then scored by humans, and the result with the highest score is selected as the synthesized pseudo-label. As shown in Fig.1, although this way of label collection equals integration of the ever-best performance of previous works, a large number of labels are noisy because all previous works are not able to process them well. Consequently, the models trained by these noisy labels inevitably suffer from irreducible error and have sub-optimal performance. In particular, unlike on-land label collections, it is very challenging to remove the water medium for label collection in underwater scenarios. An alternative is to use synthetic datasets for training [21, 14, 13] where the in-air images are true labels, while the corresponding underwater images are synthesized based on the UIFM. Nevertheless, the synthetic-to-real gap leads to certain performance degradation when models are trained with synthetic images but implemented on real-world underwater images [13]. 

2.3. Diffusion Models 

The Diffusion model[38] is a generative model that is widely used for image tasks. Based on the diffusion probabilistic model proposed in [12], it learns to generate (a) (b) (c) (d)  

> Figure 3: The limitation of finetuning diffusion model by fully synthetic underwater images. (a), (b), (c), (d) are the raw underwater images, enhanced results by [13], the intermediate enhanced result by the global color correction, and the final enhanced result of our overall proposal, respectively.

target images by progressively denoising the latent space representation with added noise. It has been widely adopted because of its surprising efficiency and ability to generate detailed and diverse images in various visual tasks including super-resolution[48], inpainting [20], and image restoration [29]. More importantly, the open-source diffusion models are always pre-trained with large-scale datasets across var-ious domains. It means that the pre-trained models already have extensive real-scene understanding, which effectively reduces the time and effort required to extend the diffu-sion models to new applications. Recently, PFUSIE [13] proposes to leverage embedded real-world knowledge in the pre-trained diffusion model, which is also referred to diffusion prior, to narrow the synthetic-to-real gap so that diffusion-based UIE models trained by the fully synthetic dataset show competitive performance on the real-world UIE task. However, it is still difficult for the diffusion model to work perfectly with real and complex underwater physics by using fully synthetic datasets based on simplified UIFM. 

## 3. Methodology 

3.1. Preliminary 

Although diffusion prior helps much to narrow the synthetic-to-real gap, the diffusion model learned directly from full synthetic underwater images based on the UIFM still suffers from certain performance degradation when implemented on the real-world UIE task, causing artifacts   

> First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 4 of 20

Short Title of the Article 𝐼 ఒ                     

> ௨௪ =𝑓 ி𝐼 ௧,𝑑 ,𝜆 +𝑓 ஻(𝐵 ఒ
> ஶ,𝑑 ,𝜆 )
> Full Underwater Image
> Formulation Model
> Diffusion Prior: Narrow the
> Synthetic-to-Real Gap
> 𝐼 ఒ
> ௖=𝑓 ி
> ௖(𝐼 ௧,𝜆 ) + 𝑓 ஻
> ௖(𝐵 ఒ
> ஶ,𝜆 )
> Synthetic Images with Color Bias
> under Fixed Depth
> Residual: Depth-related
> Degradation Similar to
> Atmospheric Hazy Effect
> Global
> Color Correction Hazy Removal
> End-to-End Fine-tuning with
> Background Noise Suppression
> Full Task
> Underwater Image Enhancement
> Data Prior: Real-world
> Dense Hazy Distribution
> 𝐼 ௥௘௦
> ௛=𝑓 ி
> ௛(𝐼 ௧,𝑑 ) + 𝑓 ஻
> ௛(𝑑 )
> Dehazed Image with
> Noisy Background
> Semantic Prior: Mask Generation
> for Region-wise Enhancement

Physics-based Transfer Learning for UIE   

> Full-Task
> End to End
> Model
> Physically-generated
> Real Hazy Effect
> Single Step
> Underwater
> Image
> Enhanced
> Image
> :Steps Decomposed from Full UIE Based on
> Physical Imaging Model
> :Trained Models with Priors from Relevant
> Research Fields for Transfer Learning
> Noise Suppression
> Effects Removal
> Refined
> E2E Model
> Inference Stage

Figure 4: Framework of the Proposal. 

in some results. This is because the UIFM is a simplified version of the complex real underwater physics. As shown in Fig.3(b), PFUSIE [13] struggles to obtain clear images that preserve the richness and correctness of the color pattern. Therefore, instead of training a UIE model supervised by real world images with noisy labels or by synthetic images based on simplified UIFM, we propose to decompose the full physical effect into different sub-degradations and then take advantage of multiple model and data priors from related visual tasks that can provide labels or guidance for enhancement which are more reliable by virtue of being better-aligned with the real world. Taking formula 7 as an example, the effect could be roughly decomposed into 1) color-related degradation caused by the parameter Nrer 𝜆 and 2) left depth-related degradation caused by 𝐷 (𝑥 ) and 𝑑 (𝑥 ).By such a physics-based model decomposition, different enhanced models focus only on the local simplified water effect, and therefore perform well on the local enhancement with the help of corresponding priors. In this way of physics-based transfer learning, the synthetic-real discrepancy re-sulting from simplified UIFM is significantly reduced. Fig.4 illustrates the general structure of our proposal about how different priors are integrated into each decom-position step. Generally speaking, these priors are primarily used to provide domain-specific adaption (pre-trained diffu-sion model) or supervisory signals (real hazy dataset and se-mantic model) to the targeting model. As mentioned above, the UIE task is mainly decomposed into three cascade steps based on the physical image formulation model, which are global color correction, haze removal, and final background noise suppression. First, for global color correction, syn-thetic images with region-wise constant color bias are used for training. This simple bias pattern along with the diffusion prior [13] allows the expected rough color correction in the real-world underwater images even trained in the synthetic domain. Next, for haze removal, another diffusion model is trained using a real-world dense haze dataset [1] where the haze effect is physically generated. The real distribution of the dense haze contributes to a clear and natural foreground result. After that, to suppress the possible noisy background part, the smooth background part of the result after global color correction is segmented semantic models SAM2 [37] and DINOv3 [40] and used for region-wise enhancement incorporated with the contrast-enhanced foreground part after hazy removal. The pre-trained diffusion model [38] is used for color correction, hazy removal, and end-to-end training. In the inference stage, only the refined model of the final end-to-end training is used for single-step underwater image enhancement. 

3.2. Practical Implementation 

3.2.1. Parameter Configuration and Priors Implementation 

The water body is assumed to be homogeneous, imply-ing constant absorption and scattering coefficients per unit voxel. This common assumption, widely adopted in physics-based underwater enhancement methods, is applicable to the vast majority of practical scenarios. The physics parame-ters for synthesis follow Equation 7. The surface-to-object depth and object-to-sensor distance are randomly sampled 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 5 of 20 Short Title of the Article Diffusion Model Prior For Step I:              

> Global Color Correction
> Training Stage : Full Synthetic
> Images to Fine-tune the Pre-trained
> Model with Real-world Prior
> Testing Stage :Transferred to Perform
> Well on Real-world Images, but with
> Residual Degradation
> 𝐼 ఒ
> ୡ=𝐼 ఒ
> ୲⋅𝑁𝑒𝑟𝑑 ఒ
> ஽௫ ାௗ ಷ+𝐵 ఒ1 − 𝑁𝑒𝑟𝑑 ఒ
> ௗಳ
> Simple Color Bias

Figure 5: Step 1: Global Color Correction. 

to generate images with a continuous spectrum of visual clarity, ranging from clear to heavily blurred. In addition, the parameter range is expanded from several discrete values to a continuous range [13] to ensure that the proposal can be adopted under various color biases. Therefore, the general-izability of the model is guaranteed. In summary, the priors used for transfer learning serve as cross-domain supervision signals or model parameter initial-ization: 1) The diffusion prior provides the initialized model parameters that are learned from Internet-scale datasets, and therefore provides extensive real scene understanding as analyzed in [13]. This will reduce training time and effort to fine-tune them to accommodate other tasks related to scene understanding. In particular, it helps the color correction step because there is no real-world dataset with true labels, and the model is trained by synthetic underwater images. Although the diffusion model is fine-tuned by synthetic data, it performs well in the task of real-world image color correc-tion due to the embedded diffusion prior. 2) The real-world hazy images with physically-generated true labels and the foreground-background segmentation labels derived from pre-trained segmentation model provide the guidance for the supervision transfer learning, respectively. These labels are more aligned with real-world scenarios compared with those of full-synthesized based on simplified UIFM. 3) Similarly, the semantic models provide foreground-background labels to supervise the final end-to-end training aimed at smoothing the noisy background. Consequently, when these priors are integrated, the final model becomes more capable of han-dling the enhancement of the overall water effect. 

3.2.2. Global Color Correction with Region-wise Color Bias 

For ease of understanding, the definitions of important variables used in Section.3 are given in Tab.1. In this step, a pre-trained stable diffusion model [38] is fine-tuned to roughly correct the color bias of the raw underwater images, which is demonstrated in Fig.5. As analyzed in Section 3.1, the foreground part is set to have a fixed degradation depth 

Variables Definitions 

𝜆 color channel in 𝑅, 𝐺, 𝐵 

Nrer normalized residual energy ratio representing the energy decay in the water medium 

𝐷 (𝑥 ) surface-to-object (vertical) depth 

𝐵 𝜆 channel-wise veiling light representing the accumulated back-scattering effect 

𝑑 𝐹 , 𝑑 𝐵 object-to-sensor (horizontal) depth of the foreground/background part 

𝐼 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠 residual degraded image after global color correction which showing haze effect 

𝑓 𝐹 , 𝑓 𝐵 residual degradation function for the fore-ground/background part after global color correction 

𝐼 𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑟 clear image without any hazy effect 

𝐼 ℎ𝑎𝑧𝑒 hazy image based on atmosphere scattering model 

𝑇 transmission map representing the depth-depended degradation 

𝐴 global atmospheric light 

𝐹 ℎ, 𝐹 𝑐 semantic feature of the haze result after global color correction/the coarse result after hazy removal 

 encoder of the Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) to compress the input into latent space 

 decoder of the VAE to decompress the latent result into the pixel space 

Table 1 

Important variables and definitions used in Section.3. 

𝑑 1, while the background part is set to have another fixed degradation depth 𝑑 2 > 𝑑 1. In this way, the learning burden is significantly reduced with less synthetic-real discrepancy. As shown in Fig.3, PFUSIE [13] struggles to obtain clear images that preserve the richness and correctness of the color pattern (Fig.3(b)). Instead, the proposed color correction only focuses on and thus performs well to roughly eliminate global color bias (Fig.3(c)), leaving the left effect to the 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 6 of 20 Short Title of the Article 

following steps for a final enhanced result with better quality (Fig.3(d)). The simplified synthetic formula is described as follows: 

𝐼 𝑐 𝜆 = 𝐼 𝑡 𝜆 ⋅ Nrer 𝐷 (𝑥 )+ 𝑑 𝐹  

> 𝜆

+ 𝐵 𝜆 (1 − Nrer 𝑑 𝐵  

> 𝜆

), (8) where 𝐼 𝑐 𝜆 , 𝐼 𝑡 𝜆 are the synthetic images with region-wise color bias and corresponding target ground truth, Nrer is the water type parameter representing the level of degradation. 

𝐷 (𝑥 ) is the surface-to-object depth to simulate the global vertical color degradation. 𝑑 𝐹 = 𝑑 1 is the fixed depth for the foreground part. 𝑑 𝐵 = 𝑑 1 if the pixel belongs to the foreground part, while 𝑑 𝐵 = 𝑑 2 if the pixel belongs to the background part. 𝜆 ∈ { 𝑅, 𝐺, 𝐵 } means that depth-related degradation differs from color channels. After global color correction, the enhanced images will show a haze effect. This is because removing the color bias defined by region-wise fixed depth serves to change the channel-wise degradation to be channel insensitive to 

𝜆 ∈ { 𝑅, 𝐺, 𝐵 }, but the effect caused by the scene-related depth distribution still exists. By comparing formula 7 and formula 8, which are the full UIFM and image formation model for global color bias, the residual effects could be roughly described as: 

𝐼 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠 (𝑥 ) = 𝐼 𝑡 (𝑥 ) ⋅ 𝑓 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑑 (𝑥 )) + (1 − 𝑓 𝐵 (𝑥, 𝑑 (𝑥 ))) , (9) where 𝐼 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠 is the residual degraded image, 𝑓 𝐹 , 𝑓 𝐵 are the left degradation for the foreground part and the background part, which are depth-related but channel-insensitive, and 

𝑥 denotes pixels. 𝑑 (𝑥 ) means that the depth is related to pixels. This type of degradation is essentially very similar to the atmospheric dehazing equation [27] with white-like scattering medium causing hazy effect: 

𝐼 ℎ𝑎𝑧𝑒 = 𝐼 𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑟 ⋅ 𝑇 (𝑥, 𝑑 (𝑥 )) + 𝐴 (1 − 𝑇 (𝑥, 𝑑 (𝑥 ))) , (10) where T is the transmission map that represents the depth-dependent factor and affects the fraction of light preserved, A= {1 , 1, 1} is the global atmospheric light. 

3.2.3. Learning to Dehaze from Real-world Hazy Distribution 

Because the residual effect is homogeneous to the in-air hazy effect with white-like atmospheric parameters, another diffusion model is fine-tuned to remove this type of degrada-tion, as illustrated in Fig.6. Unlike color correction training, where the real-world paired dataset with true labels is not available, there is a hazy image dataset named DenseHaze [1] that has both the real dense hazy images and its true labels. The real hazy images are captured in a physically-generated fog environment. Taking advantage of the real-world densely-hazy images with true labels, the fine-tuned diffusion model learns well about the real-world hazy distribution and is able to dehaze the color-corrected images to a very clear and natural pattern on the foreground part. As demonstrated in the bottom of Fig.6, the hazy effect in the processed images after global color correction has been effectively eliminated, resulting in the expected enhanced images with high contrast. However, the background part of some enhanced images is noisy, as is observed. This reason behind is that although using dense hazy images contributes to a clear and high contrast result, the dense hazy effect diminishes the distinction between the foreground and background, which in turn leads to an unreasonable enhancement of the background contrast. An ideal enhanced image should have a high contrast pattern in the foreground area, while the background area is always expected to be smooth and not so noisy. Therefore, a further process is required to address the noisy background problem. 

3.2.4. Semantic Segmentation for Background Noise Suppression with Automatically Generated Prompts 

Notably, although the output of the color correction task is hazy, the smooth results in the background part meet the requirement mentioned above. This is because the hazy effect is the residual in the enhanced result of global color correction. Such a hazy and homogeneous background with the correct color pattern suppresses the noisy background to improve the visual quality as shown in Fig.8 (b), (c). Hence, we additionally implement semantic segmentation on the hazy images to extract the expected background part to further refine the enhanced result. Specifically, the embedded prior of two pre-trained se-mantic models Segment Anything v2 (SAM2) [37] and DI-NOv3 [40] are used to segment the two parts. As illustrated on the right-hand side of Fig.7, SAM2 labels the foreground and background parts according to the input images and the point-based prompt to generate masks. Manually labeling the foreground-background prompt is quite laborious and is not suitable for scalable label generation. Therefore, an automatic prompt generation strategy is designed based on the semantic difference of enhanced images after global color correction ("haze") and dehazed images with noisy background ("coarse"). First, the semantic features of these two images are extracted by DINOv3 [40]. The semantic difference is then defined as the cosine projection: 

𝐹 𝑑𝑖𝑓 𝑓 = 1 − cos( 𝐹 ℎ ⋅ 𝐹 𝑐 ), (11) where 𝐹 ℎ, 𝐹 𝑐 are the semantic features of the haze and coarse images, respectively. After that, the Top N pixels with the maximal feature difference are selected as the background point prompts because of the dramatic semantic changes induced by noise. In contrast, another Top N pixels with minimal feature difference are selected as the fore-ground part prompts because of the stable semantic infor-mation. The above process of automatic prompt generation is illustrated in the right hand side of Fig.7. In this way, human intervention is greatly minimized, leading to a significant reduction in data processing time and enabling scalable data labeling, since prompt labeling is the most time-consuming part. Although the proposed strategy supports automatic prompt generation for masking, the DNIOv3-SAM2 pipeline cannot generate perfect masks in some cases. Therefore, a partial   

> First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 7 of 20

Short Title of the Article Training Stage : Physically-Generated Dense Haze: Real-world Hazy Distribution Prior                    

> Testing Stage : Transferred to Eliminate the Residual Degradation Similar to Hazy Effect
> Data Prior for Step II: Hazy Removal
> 𝐼 ௛௔௭௘ ൌ 𝐼 ௖௟௘௔௥ ⋅ 𝑇 𝑥 ,𝑑 𝑥 ൅ 𝐴 1െ 𝑇 𝑥 ,𝑑 𝑥 𝐼 ௥௘௦ ௛𝑥 ൌ 𝐼 ୲𝑥 ⋅ 𝑓 ி𝑥 ,𝑑 𝑥 ൅1െ 𝑓 ஻𝑥 ,𝑑 𝑥

Figure 6: Step II: Hazy Removal based on Real-world Dense Haze Dataset. Semantic Perception by DINOv3           

> SAM 2
> Semantic Diff.
> 𝐹 ௗ௜௙௙ in the Feature Space
> Haze Coarse
> Semantic Feature 𝐹 ௛and 𝐹 ௖AutoMask
> Point-based
> Prompt
> Image
> 𝐹 ௗ௜௙௙ =
> 1 − cos 𝐹 ௛⋅ 𝐹 ௖
> Automatic
> Prompt
> Underwater Image
> Cos. Projection as
> Semantic Similarity
> Low
> High
> •Foreground
> •Background
> Segmentation on
> Haze Image

Figure 7: The process of Automatic Foreground-Background Masking based on Semantic foundation models. The semantic features are colorized after dimensionality reduction by Principal Component Analysis(PCA), while the semantic difference image is normalized to 0-1 and then colorized. 

training strategy is also proposed: 1) if the foreground segmentation is correct (no need to fully segmented, but the labeled foreground part is fully correct as shown in the first row of Fig.8), then only the foreground part of the dehazed image is used for training; 2) if the background segmentation is correct (also no need to fully segmented but the labeled background part is fully correct as shown in the second row of Fig.8), then only the background part of the hazy image is used for training; 3) if both the foreground and background parts are segmented in a reasonable way, then these two parts are randomly used for partial training. 4) if both of these two parts are segmented incorrectly, then the image is discarded. In summary, the final End-to-End model learns a region-wise enhancement strategy to properly suppress the noise of the background but to increase the clarity of the foreground, as shown in Fig.8 (e). 

3.3. Diffusion-based Formulation for Image Enhancement 

As mentioned in Section 2.3, pre-trained diffusion mod-els demonstrate previously unattainable capabilities in the field of high-quality image generation. Therefore, the models used in the global color correction, hazy removal, and final end-to-end enhancement are all from an open-source pre-trained model 1, and the whole process is depicted in Fig.9. In this work, these three steps for image enhancement are uniformly reformulated as the task of conditional denoising diffusion generation, and the pre-trained diffusion model providing an extensive embedded real-world scene prior is used in all these three steps for initialization to accelerate the training process. The diffusion model learns the probabilistic distribution of the data 𝐱 0 ∼ 𝑝 (𝐱 ) through a forward diffusion process and a reverse denoising process followed, where 

> 1https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 8 of 20 Short Title of the Article (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)  

> Final End-to-End Training based on  Partial Mask
> E2E Model  for  Full UIE  Inputs
> Training Inference

Figure 8: Examples of the final end-to-end training with background noise suppression conducted. Columns (a), (b), (c) are the raw underwater images, enhanced results after global color correction, and enhanced results after haze removal, respectively. Columns (d) and (e) denote the segmentation masks and corresponding results of end-to-end training. Low-dimension Latent Space 

𝐷 ఏℰℰ        

> Sampled Noise concat
> Learnable Denoising U-Net
> 𝐼 ௗ௘ 𝑧 ௟௔ 𝑧 ௗ௘ 𝑧̃ ௟௔ 𝑧̂ ℒ௥௘௖௢௡
> VAE Encoder VAE Encoder
> Conditioning input
> 𝐼 ௟௔ 𝑧̂ 𝑧 ௟௔

𝒟   

> VAE Decoder
> 𝐼 ୰ୣୡ
> 𝐼 ௟௔ ℒ ௥௘௖௢௡

Figure 9: The pipeline of fine-tuning diffusion model in the latent space. 

𝐱 0, 𝐱 are the expected enhanced images and the correspond-ing degraded images, respectively. In the forward diffusion process, the model first adds a certain noise pattern to the data to destroy its structure, then it learns to reverse the process by denoising the initial noisy input to reconstruct the original data under conditioning input which are degraded images. To ensure computational efficiency and suitability for high-resolution image generation, the denoising process is implemented in a low-dimensional latent space as adopted in [8, 13]. Instead of directly working on the pixel space, the latent space is enclosed by a Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) that is also pre-trained independently. The VAE consists of two components: an encoder  and a decoder . The input 

𝐱 , which is a degraded or target image in this proposal, is transformed by VAE: 𝐳 (𝐱 ) = (𝐱 ),̂ 𝐱 = (𝐳 (𝐱 )), where 𝐳 (𝐱 ),̂𝐱 are the latent representation and the reconstructed version of the input image, respectively. The denoiser, which is a U-net 𝐷 𝜃 with network param-eters 𝜃 , is fine-tuned in the latent space to perform image enhancement. In the training stage, the degraded image 𝐼 𝑑𝑒 

and its enhanced paired image as the label 𝐼 𝑙𝑎 are encoded by the VAE encoder  as: 

𝐳 𝑑𝑒 = (𝐼 𝑑𝑒 ) ∈ ℝ𝑊 ×𝐻 ×𝐷 , 𝐳 𝑙𝑎 = (𝐼 𝑙𝑎 ) ∈ ℝ𝑊 ×𝐻 ×𝐷 , (12) where 𝐻, 𝑊 , 𝐷 are the height, width and dimension of the latent space. The noise 𝜖 following a certain distribution 𝑝 

is then randomly sampled and added to 𝐳 𝑙𝑎 as ̃ 𝐳 𝑙𝑎 , which is concatenated with the conditioning input 𝐳 𝑑𝑒 as ̃ 𝐳 𝑐𝑎𝑡 ∈

ℝ𝑊 ×𝐻 ×2 𝐷 .̃ 𝐳 𝑐𝑎𝑡 will then be denoised by 𝐷 𝜃 to a latent estimation ̂ 𝐳 , which should ideally align with 𝐳 𝑙𝑎 . The loss function is given as: 

 = 𝔼 𝜖 ∼𝑝 || ̂𝐳 − 𝐳 𝑙𝑎 || 22. (13) For the diffusion model trained for the final end-to-end enhancement, the loss in the original pixel-space space in a partial training manner is alternatively given as: 

 = 𝔻 𝜖 ∼𝑝 || ((̂𝐳 ) − 𝐼 𝑙𝑎 ) ⋅ 𝑀 || 22, (14) where 𝑀 denotes masks with 

𝑀 𝑏 (𝑥 ) = 0 , 𝑀 𝑓 (𝑥 ) = 1 (15) for the foreground partial training and 

𝑀 𝑏 (𝑥 ) = 1 , 𝑀 𝑓 (𝑥 ) = 0 (16) for the background partial training, where 𝑥 is the pixel and the superscripts 𝑓 , 𝑏 represent the foreground and back-ground, respectively. 

## 4. Experiments Results 

4.1. Implementation Details 

For the global color correction step, the synthetic un-derwater images are based on the TARTAN [46] dataset. 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 9 of 20 Short Title of the Article 

The TARTAN dataset is a synthetic dataset that contains various indoor and outdoor scenarios. It is collected from a photorealistic simulation platform. The ground truth depth map allows for the UIFM-based underwater image synthesis. For the haze removal step, the DenseHaze dataset [1] is selected for training. It contains 33 pairs of hazy image-ground truths of various outdoor scenes, where the hazy effect is real and is generated by professional haze machines. Therefore, a real-world hazy distribution is available for the model to dehaze images well. For quantitative and qualitative comparison, two real-world underwater image datasets LSUI [34] and EUVP [15] are selected. LSUI contains 4279 underwater images with pseudo-labels, while EUVP contains 6665 underwater im-ages with the labels generated by the GAN-based approach. We do not use noisy labels of the LSUI and EUVP for full-reference comparisons such as peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and structural similarity (SSIM). Instead, we mainly take the Non-Reference Image Quality Assessment (NR-IQA) for the performance evaluation. In Semi-UIR [14], Multi-Scale Image Quality (MUSIQ) [19] and From Patches to Pictures (PAQ2PIQ) [51] rank first in terms of metric reliability, while Uranker [10] and MUSIQ are first as an-alyzed in [10]. Therefore, Uranker, MUSIQ, and PAQ2PIQ are selected as NR-IQA indies to quantitatively evaluate the algorithm performance. Because some previous works [14, 5, 35, 31, 33] fix the evaluation resolution as 256x256, we follow them to compare the results with such image resolution. The proposal is compared with ten SOTA UIE methods developed in recent two years, including Semi-UIR (2023, CVPR) [14], PUGAN (2023, TIP) [5], CCL (2024, TMM) [26], HCLR (2024, IJCV) [55], WF-Diff (2024, CVPR) [53], DPF-Net (2025, ISPRS) [31], CE-VAE (2025, WACV) [35], SS-UIE (2025, AAAI) [33], UIE-CLIP (2025, ISPRS) [3], and PFUSIE (2025, IF) [13]. The diffusion models used in the color correction, haze removal, and the final end-to-end UIE task are all fine-tuned from the pre-trained version of Stable Diffusion 2

on 4 RTX3090 GPUs for 80k iterations. The detailed fine-tuning strategy is followed by [8] with a fixed timestep and deterministic noise distribution. The learning rate is set to 3e-5, with the Adam optimizer parameters as 𝛽 1 = 0.9

and 𝛽 2 = 0.999 . Due to the GPU memory limitation, the batch size is set to 1 per GPU and the resolution of training images is fixed to 512x512. The gradient accumula-tion step is set to 20, which means that the effective batch size is 80. For the TARTAN dataset, we set the surface-to-object depth randomly sampled from [0 , 5] followed by [21], and the object-to-sensor distance is set to 0/5 for the foreground/background area, respectively. In addition, the water type Nrer = {Nrer 𝑅 , Nrer 𝐺 , Nrer 𝐵 } is set in the range of: 

∑

> 𝜆

Nrer 𝜆 > 1.3, (17) 

> 2https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2

where max 𝜆 Nrer 𝜆 > 0.6, Nrer 𝜆 ∈ (0 , 1) followed by [13]. For the DenseHaze dataset, because there are only 33 pairs for training, a data augmentation strategy is implemented: 1) The original images are randomly cropped to 768x768; 2) Then the cropped images are randomly rotated with a maximum rotation angle of 30 degrees; 3) The augmented images are resized to 512x512 for training. In the background noisy superssion stage, the SAM2 API 3 is utilized for prompted-based foreground-background segmentation. To fine-tune the final end-to-end underwater image enhancement diffusion model, The following detailed steps are implemented: 

• We tested fine-tuned color correction and haze re-moval diffusion models on four other underwater datasets UIEB [22], UVE38K [36], UVEB [49] and DRUVA [42]. The UVE38K, DRUVA, and UVEB datasets are three underwater video datasets that include various scenarios and water conditions. The UIEB dataset is a full reference underwater image dataset that is widely used for most supervised learning-based methods, although the labels are also noisy. For each scene in the three video datasets, several images with a proper sampling step are selected to remove color bias and the hazy effect. 

• The proposed semantic-based pipeline is used to auto-matically generate masks. This is followed by a very lightweight manual selection step, where the gener-ated masks are labeled for partial training. Each mask is categorized as one of the following: "foreground training," "background training", "full training", or "discarded.". "full training" means that both parts are available for partial training. 

• The end-to-end UIE diffusion model is fine-tuned by the collected dataset P2UIE_1473 (800 from UIEB and 673 from three video datasets) with mask guid-ance introduced in 3.2.4. To show that the perfor-mance gain can be attributed to the proposal rather than the increasing number of training images (most of the comparison methods are trained by UIEB), we only use the UIEB subset of P2UIE_1473 for training for a fair comparison, but we tested the entire P2UIE dataset. Notice that it causes no data leakage because we use non-reference metrics that are not calculated based on the ground-truth for performance evaluation. 

4.2. Qualitative and Quantitative Results Comparison 

Tab.2 shows the quantitative results of different methods with respect to three test datasets and three metrics. The average rank is calculated by 

∑ 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑡 ∕( 𝑁 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑡 ⋅ 𝑁 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑐 ), (18) where 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑡 is the rank of a method among all methods of a dataset-metric pair. The proposal is far superior to   

> 3https://github.com/facebookresearch/sam2
> First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 10 of 20

Short Title of the Article Method EUVP[15] LSUI[34] P2UIE_1473 Avg. Rank ↓                                                                                                                      

> PAQ2PIQ ↑MUSIQ ↑Uranker ↑PAQ2PIQ ↑MUSIQ ↑Uranker ↑PAQ2PIQ ↑MUSIQ ↑Uranker ↑
> Semi-UIR[14] 74.909 50.410 2.472 72.565 43.268 2.365 73.018 46.358 1.993 3.33 PUGAN[5] 74.323 46.751 2.383 71.734 39.171 2.264 73.192 42.197 2.091 6.00 CCL[26] 74.393 48.638 2.051 71.876 40.662 1.954 73.659 47.703 1.722 5.78 HCLR[55] 74.094 48.330 2.235 71.227 39.800 2.112 72.774 45.002 1.992 6.89 WF-Diff[53] 73.556 51.483 2.057 70.594 44.922 1.805 70.062 46.083 1.518 8.11 CE-VAE[35] 74.215 49.498 1.897 71.816 43.919 1.678 71.001 42.243 1.562 8.00 SS-UIE[33] 73.672 49.750 1.931 71.037 42.538 1.812 71.523 46.624 1.765 7.44 DPF-Net[31] 73.633 47.976 2.196 70.734 40.314 2.040 71.631 47.588 1.730 7.78 PFUSIE[13] 73.067 51.492 2.378 71.891 44.165 2.169 72.968 48.958 1.841 4.44 UIE-CLIP[3] 74.110 48.747 2.164 71.014 40.568 2.012 72.539 45.610 1.909 7.11
> Ours 74.921 54.598 2.553 73.417 48.715 2.502 73.315 52.288 2.409 1.11

Table 2 

Comparison of ten different methods on three datasets and three metrics (the higher is better). For each metric of a given dataset, the best result is in bold , the result ranks 2th is with underline. 

previous works, ranking first for 8 of 9 metrics. The second and third ranking methods are Semi-UIR and PFUSIE, but the ranking value obviously drops. The reason behind this is that our method is based on transfer learning and cross-domain supervision. We do not use the heavily biased label of underwater images for end-to-end supervision or simply use fully synthetic underwater images for training, both causing non-ignorable synthetic-real discrepancy. Instead, the UIE is decomposed into global color correction and haze removal, where the diffusion prior and the real-world hazy distribution are leveraged to address these two prob-lems, respectively. Furthermore, the foreground-background understanding embedded in the semantic model also helps to generate enhanced images with noise-suppressed back-ground to have better visual quality. Although there is a lack of true labels for underwater images, this physics-based task decomposition and transfer learning strategy enables the feasibility of enhancing underwater images well. In contrast, while the mentioned benchmark methods have made much progress, they mainly focus on network design and training strategy for label-alignment, paying little attention to the is-sue of unreliable labels. Meanwhile, the qualitative compari-son result is illustrated in Fig.10, where the advantage of our proposal is more obvious, showing a correct color pattern, a high contrast foreground and a smooth background. When physical settings are configured at the stage of image synthesis, the water parameters vary in a continuous range, including different color bias conditions. In addition, the depth is also set as a range containing different condi-tions of visual clarity, from pure clear to almost invisible. Moreover, The real-world heavily hazy dataset also provides the knowledge to effectively remove the depth-related degra-dation. Therefore, the model has witnessed various water effects from slight degradation to heavy degradation, and is able to significantly improve the quality of underwater images as shown in Fig.11, which is the overall visual result compared to the previous noisy labels and raw underwater images in the two paired datasets LSUI and UIEB. The performance of P2UIE is better than that of the models su-pervised by the previous labels and, more importantly, more stable among different images under various degradation conditions. Fig.12 shows additional results of semantic differences in the feature space for automatic prompt generation. For rows 1, 2, the generated masks only support partial train-ing (background and foreground, respectively). For rows 4, both parts are segmented correctly. Therefore, the gener-ated mask supports training for either part. However, for row 3, although the prompt automatically generated from semantic difference is reasonable, the mask is not suitable for training and is discarded. In our experiment, the numbers of generated masks that 1) only support partial training 2) training for both parts 3) not suitable for training are 539, 197, 64, respectively. By the proposed partial training, the model learns to process the two areas in a different way to simultaneously 1) emphasize the foreground part while 2) smooth the background part to suppress possible noise. Fig.13 illustrates details about the intermediate results of the proposed framework, including the local enhancement results and the corresponding semantic features. Semantic features are visualized by selecting the first three main components of the PCA. Semantic clustering in the feature space is observed to become more precise in the proposed framework process (red rectangles), and the final enhanced results demonstrate the best performance of semantic per-ception. This phenomenon is very obvious in the left-bottom scene, where the diver feature in the final result is much more different from the background than in the previous raw image or in the intermediate results. There are two main reasons: first, the background noise is suppressed and less informa-tive; second, the texture of the foreground part is forced to be emphasized and greatly improved, which is reversely more informative. Consequently, the final enhanced results show high visual quality in both the pixel and semantic feature space. The full-reference performance evaluation is also con-ducted on two synthetic datasets: Replica [41] and UWCNN [21]. Since SemiUIR [14] and PUGAN [5] are trained using UWCNN [21], we exclude their full-reference metrics on the UWCNN dataset. To enable a comprehensive comparison including SemiUIR and PUGAN, we also follow UWCNN to synthesize an underwater dataset on Replica [41]. As shown in Tab.3, the proposed P2UIE achieves competitive average performance. Moreover, Fig.14 presents a visual 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 11 of 20 Short Title of the Article (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) (k) (l) 

Figure 10: Quantitative results on three datasets. Row 1-4, 5-9, 10-15 are sampled from dataset EUVP, LSUI and our self-collected P2UIE_1473, respectively. Column (a) represents the raw underwater images, while columns (b)-(k) are the enhanced results of previous works CCL [26], CE-VAE [35], DPF [31], UIE-CLIP [3], HCLR [55], PUGAN [5], Semi-UIR [14], SSUIE [33], PFUSIE [13], WFDiff [53]. Column (l) illustrates the enhanced results of the proposal. First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 12 of 20 Short Title of the Article (a): LSUI Raw Images (b): UIEB Raw Images 

(c): LSUI Previous Labels (d): UIEB Previous Labels 

(e): LSUI Enhanced by Ours (f): UIEB Enhanced by Ours 

Figure 11: An overview of the raw images ((a),(b)), previous noisy labels ((c),(d)), and the enhanced results of the proposed P2UIE ((e),(f)). (a), (c), (e) are from the dataset LSUI, while (b), (d), (f) are from the dataset UIEB. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) 

Figure 12: For each row, columns (a) to (g) represent the underwater image (a), the color corrected image (b), the dehazed image (c), the DINO feature of the color corrected image (d), the DINO feature of the dehazed image (e), the feature difference of (d) and (e), and the generated mask based on SAM2 from automatic prompt, respectively. Method UWCNN Replica PSNR SSIM PSNR SSIM SemiUIR[14] - - 17.3238 0.7902 PUGAN[5] - - 17.0560 0.7864 CCL[26] 14.1947 0.6571 13.6678 0.7271 HCLR[55] 13.8729 0.6788 15.1753 0.7816 WF-Diff[53] 13.8815 0.6005 14.6689 0.6366 CE-VAE[35] 13.9209 0.6222 16.0331 0.7590 SS-UIE[33] 13.7279 0.6447 17.3238 0.7631 DPF-Net[31] 14.1770 0.6554 16.9647 0.7628 PFUSIE[13] 13.8916 0.6682 15.5196 0.7523 UIE-CLIP[3] 14.0991 0.6909 16.3065 0.8009 Ours 15.2018 0.6704 17.5133 0.7937 

Table 3 

PSNR and SSIM comparison on UWCNN [21] and Replica [41] datasets. Colors red, green, and blue represents the first, second, and third best performance for each metric and dataset. 

comparison, demonstrating that P2UIE achieves better vi-sual clarity among the evaluated UIE methods. 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 13 of 20 Short Title of the Article (b) (a) 

# (d) (c)          

> Figure 13: Illustration of the intermediate results. For each subfigure, the first row shows the underwater image, the color corrected image, the dehazed image, and the final enhanced image, respectively; while the second row represents the corresponding semantic feature extracted from DINO model and visualized by PCA. Raw
> CCL HCLR WF-Diff
> CE-VAE SS-UIE DPF-Net
> PFUSIE UIE-CLIP Ours GT
> Figure 14: Quantitative performance comparison on the syn-thetic dataset UWCNN [21].

4.3. Ablation Study and Discussions 

To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed design, three different ablation experiments were conducted. First, we directly fine-tuned a diffusion model using dataset UIEB for end-to-end UIE task, which means the heavily biased labels are utilized for supervised learning. The results is denoted as UIEB . Second, we replaced the real-world hazy distribution with synthetic hazy images for the haze removal step(the synthetic process is followed by [27] in the TAR-TAN dataset [46]. The result is denoted as TARTAN . Third, we remove the step of background noise suppression. The result is denoted as NoSeg , which means "no segmentation". For each ablation experiment, the other settings are kept the same. For example, in TARTAN , the background noise suppression is preserved, then the fused enhanced images are used for the final end-to-end fine-tuning of a new dif-fusion model that directly recovers underwater images. The quantitative comparison result with respect to three metrics is shown in Tab.4. It is observed that both foreground-background segmentation and real-world hazy distribution contribute to performance improvement. In addition, unreli-able labels actually impair the overall enhancement quality because the color bias and low contrast effects are not well addressed in the labels. We also provide a quantitative comparison on the aver-age time it takes to generate End-to-End training masks in Section 3.2.4 using the proposed automatic prompt labeling strategy and fully manual labeling. As shown in Tab 5, the manual prompt labeling step takes more than 15 seconds per image, which is the most time-consuming process and prevents the framework from collecting scalable datasets. In contrast, the total time drops to about 86.9% when replaced by automatic prompt labeling. Although minimal human   

> First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 14 of 20

Short Title of the Article Method EUVP[15] LSUI[34] P2UIE_1473 Avg. Rank ↓                                                

> PAQ2PIQ ↑MUSIQ ↑Uranker ↑PAQ2PIQ ↑MUSIQ ↑Uranker ↑PAQ2PIQ ↑MUSIQ ↑Uranker ↑
> NoSeg 73.421 49.753 2.743 72.048 43.999 2.685 72.291 50.483 2.396 2.44 UIEB-Labels 74.694 49.464 2.415 71.962 41.202 2.217 73.207 47.574 2.067 3.11 TARTAN-Syn 74.097 50.945 2.083 72.078 44.229 2.063 71.369 47.276 1.704 3.22
> FULL 74.921 54.598 2.553 73.417 48.715 2.502 73.315 52.288 2.409 1.22

Table 4 

Ablation study on three datasets and three metrics (the higher is better). For each metric of a given dataset, the best result is in bold , the result ranks 2th is with underline. Avg. Time Cost (s) Manual Prompt Auto Prompt Prompt Generation 15.3 0.7 Partial Mask Labeling 1.5 1.5 Total 16.8 2.2 

Table 5 

The average time cost for generating a mask for the final end-to-end training. "Manual Prompt" means the prompt is fully labeled by human, while "Auto Prompt" means the prompt generation step is automatically processed by the proposed semantic difference-based segmentation. 

interaction has to be involved for partial mask labeling, the current time consumption is relatively reasonable compared to 16 seconds per image. The quantitative performance is given in Tab.6, showing a very slight but justifiable decrease as a compromise of a more automatic pipeline. This is because the partial but correct masks already allow network know to infer which regions should be foreground and which can be smoothed into the background. The effectiveness of the proposed partial training strat-egy instead of directly stitching the dehazed foreground part and smooth background part according to masks is also validated in Fig.15. In the end-to-end training step, if the images are directly stitched by the segmentation results fusing the foreground part of dehazed images and the smooth background part of the color-corrected images, the cut-off effect on the edges is apparent as shown in Fig.15 (d). This is due to some of the inaccurate segmentation results in the edge area. By the proposed partial training strategy where most of the images are only used for foreground or background training, the model avoids being misguided and only learns the smooth transient pattern from images with "full training" label where the visual change in the edge area is not abrupt. Fig.16 illustrates a more detailed performance analysis of the DINO-based automatic mask generation strategy. Note that the extreme color deviation and the extreme low-light condition have already improved in the previous global color-correction step, as shown in the scenes in the first two rows of Fig.16 (subfigure (b) to subfigure (a)). The DINOv3 prompt extraction is processed in the color-corrected images. Therefore, it only needs to be and is indeed robust in ex-treme turbid conditions: 1) qualitatively, the automatically extracted foreground/background prompts in subfigure (a) are reasonable to generate effective segmentation (subfigure (c)); 2) quantitatively, we also calculated the number and proportion of 1) samples that can be used for both training (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) 

Figure 15: Ablation study of partial training strategy. For each row, columns (a), (b), (c) are the underwater image, the enhanced image with/without partial training strategy, respectively. columns (d) and (e) are the zoom-in details from (b) and (c) to compare the cut-out effect on the edges. 

and testing due to effective segmentation and 2) those with useless segmentation results can only be used for testing, which is shown in Tab.7. Up to 93.3% of the samples have valid automatic segmentation based on the correct DINO prompt, which are then used for the final mask-based background noise suppression. There are still some cases where the generated prompts are completely wrong or the segmentation model is not stable on a very small number of problematic points, which makes the failure of segmentation and the corresponding underwater images could only be used for testing. However, the final E2E model trained with effective labels still generates reasonable results (subfigure (e) of the two scenes in the third row of Fig.16). In the global color correction stage (Section 3.2.2), im-age synthesis is defined as: 

𝐼 𝑐 𝜆 = 𝐼 𝑡 𝜆 ⋅ Nrer 𝐷 (𝑥 )+ 𝑑 𝐹  

> 𝜆

+ 𝐵 𝜆 (1 − Nrer 𝑑 𝐵  

> 𝜆

). (19) 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 15 of 20 Short Title of the Article Method EUVP[15] LSUI[34] P2UIE_1473 Avg. Rank ↓                            

> PAQ2PIQ ↑MUSIQ ↑Uranker ↑PAQ2PIQ ↑MUSIQ ↑Uranker ↑PAQ2PIQ ↑MUSIQ ↑Uranker ↑
> Manual 74.918 54.574 2.538 73.700 49.290 2.535 73.784 52.262 2.415 1Auto. 74.921 54.598 2.553 73.417 48.715 2.502 73.315 52.288 2.409 1.11

Table 6 

Quantitative performance based on automatic vs. manual masking. The Avg. Rank means the average metric performances compared with previous works in Tab.2. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)               

> (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
> (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
> (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
> (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)

Figure 16: Performance analysis of Dino-based automatic prompt generation strategy. For each scene, subfigure (a)-(e) represent the color corrected image, the raw underwater image, the segmentation image, the feature difference between the color corrected image and haze removed image, and the final result, respectively. The blue and green points in (a) are the foreground/background prompts extracted based on (d) for automatic segmentation. 

Type Samples 

Train&Test 1374 (93.3%) Only Test 99 (6.7%) Full dataset 1473 

Table 7 

Sample counts for train&test and test-only. 

We fix 𝑑 𝐵 as 𝑑 1 = 0 for the foreground part to leave the depth-related residual effect to be decoupled and solved in the haze removal stage (Section 3.2.3), which is already proven to be effective. Furthermore, the reason to set the background part as 5 instead of 0-5 is that we want to enlarge the pattern difference between the foreground and background area so that the model could have a different color correction strategy on these two areas, as shown in scene 4-6, subfigure (d) in Fig.17: 1) For the foreground area, we want the model to correct the global color-bias and simultaneously preserve the original color information under water-free condition; 2) For the background area, we rather want the model to remove the color information to (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) 

> Enhanced Results  Synthetic Images Scene 6  Scene 5  Scene 4  Scene 3  Scene 2  Scene 1

Figure 17: Illustration of the synthetic images and enhanced results for global color correction under different settings of 

𝑑 2. For each scene, the subfigure (a) is the ground truth (for synthetic images)/ raw underwater image (for enhanced results), where (b)-(e) are the synthetic/enhanced images under 𝑑 2 ∈ [0 , 5] , 𝑑 2 = 2 .5, 𝑑 2 = 5 .0, 𝑑 2 = 7 .5, respectively. 

a general white-like hazy background for noise suppression (Section 3.2.4) to obtain the final fusion results. In contrast, if we set 𝑑 2 from a fixed value of 5 to a continuous range (0 , 5) , the pattern difference between these two areas weakens, resulting in unsatisfied background results. Although the images only have foreground area have little difference (scene 4 in Fig.17), those underwater images with background area still have obvious residual color bias as shown in scenes 4-6, subfigure (b) in Fig. 17. This is because the continuous change from 0-5 misguides the model to clearly distinguish different regions for region-wise color processing strategies, where it may treat the background part as foreground part to preserve some color bias. This is similar to 𝑑 2 = 2 .5, where the guidance is not sufficient. Note that the unit of 𝑑 should be understood as parameters used to control the degree of degradation rather than representing actual meters because when setting 𝑑 2 ≥ 5 for underwater 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 16 of 20 Short Title of the Article Method EUVP[15] LSUI[34] P2UIE_1473 Avg. Rank ↓                            

> PAQ2PIQ ↑MUSIQ ↑Uranker ↑PAQ2PIQ ↑MUSIQ ↑Uranker ↑PAQ2PIQ ↑MUSIQ ↑Uranker ↑
> 𝑑 2=5.0 74.921 54.598 2.553 73.417 48.715 2.502 73.315 52.288 2.409 1.11
> 𝑑 2=7.5 74.923 54.595 2.549 73.415 48.718 2.504 73.313 52.290 2.406 1.11

Table 8 

Quantitative performance based on different 𝑑 2 settings. The Avg. Rank means the average metric performances compared with previous works in Tab.2. 

image synthesis, the background part is already saturated in most cases, as shown in scenes 1-3, subfigure (d) in Fig. 17. This is consistent with the real-world cases as shown in scenes 4-6, subfigures (d)-(e) in Fig.17, where increasing 

𝑑 2 from 5 to 7.5 brings almost no visual difference in the background part at all. We also conducted a quantitative experiment to further support this qualitative result by cal-culating the metric values under 𝑑 2 = 5 and 𝑑 2 = 7 .5 as shown in Tab.8. The close metric performance and identical average rank confirm that a 𝑑 2 ≥ 5 is already sufficient. 

4.4. Application: Boosting Downstream Tasks 

A promising application is to use the enhanced images to improve the performance of downstream vision tasks such as feature detection, feature matching, edge extraction, and saliency detection. In this section, we provide severe exam-ples of underwater images under challenging degradations to test the above four downstream tasks. Feature detection and matching are processed by SIFT [28], while the Canny edge detector [2] and the Manifold Ranking (MR) [50] are implemented for the detection of the edges and the saliency . As shown in Fig.18, 19, where the subfigures (a), (b), and (c) are the comparison of the results between different methods in the detection of features, edge detection, and saliency detection, the underwater images enhanced by the proposed P2UIE achieve the best average performance for downstream tasks, including more detected features, richer extracted edges, and better alignment with the real salient region. This competitive result comes from the proposed transfer learning strategy: The noisy labels where the color bias and low con-trast effect are not well solved are discarded. Instead, P2UIE resorts to multiple priors from relevant research fields for physics-based transfer learning to correctly improve image quality. In this way, the diffusion prior, real-world dense haze prior, and semantic prior are properly transferred to the model so that the generated results are with high contrast of the foreground part/smooth background part, rich and correct color pattern as desired in the downstream tasks. Fig.20 shows that the number of matching features improved significantly, where the second image is the flipped version of the raw underwater image at 180 degrees. 

4.5. Run-time Analysis and Limitations 

The average run-time comparison is given in the Tab.9. Since the proposed method is based on a diffusion model with a large model size, its parameter count and FLOPs do not exhibit an advantage. However, the acceptable inference time (around 8.69Hz) and GPU memory consumption (3133 MB) already support the real-time implementation on the (a): Feature Extraction                                  

> (c): Saliency Detection
> 532
> 432 416
> 967
> 542 675 550
> 138
> 40
> 461 460 441
> raw Semi-UIR PUGAN UIE-CLIP CCL HCLR
> WF-Diff CE-VAE SS-UIE DPF-Net PFUSIE Ours
> (b): Edge Detection
> raw Semi-UIR PUGAN UIE-CLIP CCL HCLR
> WF-Diff CE-VAE SS-UIE DPF-Net PFUSIE Ours
> WF-Diff CE-VAE SS-UIE DPF-Net PFUSIE Ours
> raw Semi-UIR PUGAN UIE-CLIP CCL HCLR

Figure 18: Examples of the downstream applications about feature extraction (a), edge (b) and saliency detection (c). The number in the images of subfigure (a) denotes the amount of detected features. 

mobile underwater platforms equipped with computational graphics like Jetson Nano, and the leading performance of our proposal represents a reasonable trade-off for the com-putational resources, particularly in applications requiring high-quality images. Although much progress has been made with the pro-posal, it still has drawbacks. For example, in the step of background noise suppression, the partial learning labels still require human intervention although the mask is de-signed to auto generate, as demonstrated in Fig.7. This human-interactive step hinders the complete automation of the method, which is inconvenient for the collection of large-scale datasets. In addition, like other UIE methods, this approach is designed for single image enhancement, where long-term temporal consistency is not integrated into the training process as a constraint. This will affect its perfor-mance on downstream applications, such as visual odometry 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 17 of 20 Short Title of the Article 160                                  

> 319 152
> 370
> 362 183 309
> 89
> 29
> 127 255 151
> raw Semi-UIR PUGAN UIE-CLIP CCL HCLR
> WF-Diff CE-VAE SS-UIE DPF-Net PFUSIE Ours
> raw Semi-UIR PUGAN UIE-CLIP CCL HCLR
> WF-Diff CE-VAE SS-UIE DPF-Net PFUSIE Ours
> raw Semi-UIR PUGAN UIE-CLIP CCL HCLR
> WF-Diff CE-VAE SS-UIE DPF-Net PFUSIE Ours
> (a): Feature Extraction
> (c): Saliency Detection
> (b): Edge Detection

Figure 19: Examples of the downstream applications about feature extraction (a), edge (b) and saliency detection (c). The number in the images of subfigure (a) denotes the amount of detected features. (a) (b) 

(c) (d) 

Figure 20: The result of feature matching by the raw under-water images (a), (c), and the corresponding images enhanced by the proposal (b), (d). 

and SLAM. Future works will be dedicated to solving the above two issues. Despite that, the innovation of our pro-posal that leveraging the multi-priors from relevant vision tasks to cross-domain supervision as well as physics-based task decomposition is validated and shown to be superior to earlier methods.                                                             

> Method Param. (MB) FLOPs (G) Inf. Time (ms) GPU Mem. (MB) Avg. Rank Semi-UIR 1.68 39.91 1840 2135 3.33 PUGAN 189.15 73.97 15 3599 6.00 CCL 1.76 109.10 56 811 5,78 HCLR 19.55 398.36 190 1345 6.89 WF-Diff 100.55 1197.53 593 1165 8.11 CE-VAE 83.44 237.15 118 5537 8.00 SS-UIE 20.63 15.15 117 5005 7.44 DPF-Net 34.44 89.42 145 2483 7.78 PFUSIE 1622.36 994.95 294.2 9981 4.44 UIE-CLIP 3.15 10.46 33 2453 7.11 Ours 949.57 530.65 115 3133 1.11

Table 9 

The computational complexity per image among different methods. The Avg. Rank means the average performance ranking as given in Tab.2 (the smaller is better). 1

## 5. Conclusion 

This paper aims to design a P2-UIE that achieves SOTA performance without requiring the true labels that are hard to collect. Meanwhile, P2UIE avoids using the current pseudo-labels that are heavily noisy for supervised learning at the same time. To achieve this goal, multiple types of knowl-edge from relevant research fields are transferred for cross-domain supervision, including diffusion model prior, real-world hazy data prior, and semantic model prior. In addition, the UIE task is mainly decomposed into three steps, includ-ing global color correction, hazy removal, and background noise suppression. Each step focuses only on the local en-hancement task to decrease the learning difficulty, and the physics-based decomposition further provides the theoret-ical soundness. The result analysis and the downstream applications support the effectiveness and significance of the proposed method, which is qualitatively and quantitatively superior to previous works. 

## 6. Acknowledgment 

This work was jointly supported by the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (25206524, 15212925), the Na-tional Natural Science Foundation of China (42301520), the Innovation and Technology Fund (PRP/068/23FX), the Seed Projects of Smart Cities Research Institute (P0051028, P0054511). 

## References 

[1] Ancuti, C.O., Ancuti, C., Sbert, M., Timofte, R., 2019. Dense-haze: A benchmark for image dehazing with dense-haze and haze-free images, in: 2019 IEEE international conference on image processing (ICIP), IEEE. pp. 1014–1018. [2] Canny, J., 2009. A computational approach to edge detection. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 679–698. [3] Cao, J., Zeng, Z., Zhang, X., Zhang, H., Fan, C., Jiang, G., Lin, W., 2025. Unveiling the underwater world: Clip perception model-guided underwater image enhancement. Pattern Recognition 162, 111395. [4] Chiang, J.Y., Chen, Y.C., 2011. Underwater image enhancement by wavelength compensation and dehazing. IEEE transactions on image processing 21, 1756–1769. [5] Cong, R., Yang, W., Zhang, W., Li, C., Guo, C.L., Huang, Q., Kwong, S., 2023. Pugan: Physical model-guided underwater image enhancement using gan with dual-discriminators. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 32, 4472–4485. 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 18 of 20 Short Title of the Article 

[6] Cong, Z., Zhou, Y., Wu, L., Tian, L., Chen, Z., Guan, M., He, L., 2025. Pgf-net: Fusing a physical imaging model with self-attention for robust underwater feature detection. Information Fusion , 103732. [7] Drews, P.L., Nascimento, E.R., Botelho, S.S., Campos, M.F.M., 2016. Underwater depth estimation and image restoration based on single images. IEEE computer graphics and applications 36, 24–35. [8] Garcia, G.M., Abou Zeid, K., Schmidt, C., De Geus, D., Hermans, A., Leibe, B., 2025. Fine-tuning image-conditional diffusion models is easier than you think, in: 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), IEEE. pp. 753–762. [9] González-Sabbagh, S.P., Robles-Kelly, A., 2023. A survey on under-water computer vision. ACM Computing Surveys 55, 1–39. [10] Guo, C., Wu, R., Jin, X., Han, L., Zhang, W., Chai, Z., Li, C., 2023. Underwater ranker: Learn which is better and how to be better, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, pp. 702–709. [11] Hambarde, P., Murala, S., Dhall, A., 2021. Uw-gan: Single-image depth estimation and image enhancement for underwater images. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement 70, 1–12. [12] Ho, J., Jain, A., Abbeel, P., 2020. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems 33, 6840–6851. [13] Hu, H., Bin, Y., Wen, C.y., Wang, B., 2025. Underwater sequential images enhancement via diffusion and physics priors fusion. Infor-mation Fusion , 103365. [14] Huang, S., Wang, K., Liu, H., Chen, J., Li, Y., 2023. Contrastive semi-supervised learning for underwater image restoration via reliable bank, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 18145–18155. [15] Islam, M.J., Xia, Y., Sattar, J., 2020. Fast underwater image enhance-ment for improved visual perception. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5, 3227–3234. [16] Jaffe, J.S., 1990. Computer modeling and the design of optimal underwater imaging systems. IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering 15, 101–111. [17] Jiang, K., Wang, R., Xiao, Y., Jiang, J., Xu, X., Lu, T., 2024. Image enhancement via associated perturbation removal and texture reconstruction learning. IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica 11, 2253–2269. [18] Jiang, K., Wang, Z., Wang, Z., Chen, C., Yi, P., Lu, T., Lin, C.W., 2022. Degrade is upgrade: Learning degradation for low-light image enhancement, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, pp. 1078–1086. [19] Ke, J., Wang, Q., Wang, Y., Milanfar, P., Yang, F., 2021. Musiq: Multi-scale image quality transformer, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 5148–5157. [20] Kim, S., Suh, S., Lee, M., 2025. Rad: Region-aware diffusion models for image inpainting, in: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp. 2439–2448. [21] Li, C., Anwar, S., Porikli, F., 2020. Underwater scene prior inspired deep underwater image and video enhancement. Pattern Recognition 98, 107038. [22] Li, C., Guo, C., Ren, W., Cong, R., Hou, J., Kwong, S., Tao, D., 2019. An underwater image enhancement benchmark dataset and beyond. IEEE transactions on image processing 29, 4376–4389. [23] Li, L., Li, H., Ren, P., 2025a. Underwater image captioning via attention mechanism based fusion of visual and textual information. Information Fusion , 103269. [24] Li, X., Sun, W., Ji, Y., Huang, W., 2025b. S2g-gcn: A plot classi-fication network integrating spectrum-to-graph modeling and graph convolutional network for compact hfswr. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters . [25] Liu, H., Chen, L., Lu, X., Wang, H., Bai, L., Wang, M., Ren, P., 2026. A visual-textual mutual guidance fusion network for remote sensing visual question answering. Pattern Recognition 176, 113258. [26] Liu, Y., Jiang, Q., Wang, X., Luo, T., Zhou, J., 2024. Underwater image enhancement with cascaded contrastive learning. IEEE Trans-actions on Multimedia . [27] Liu, Y., Zhu, L., Pei, S., Fu, H., Qin, J., Zhang, Q., Wan, L., Feng, W., 2021. From synthetic to real: Image dehazing collaborating with unlabeled real data, in: Proceedings of the 29th ACM international conference on multimedia, pp. 50–58. [28] Lowe, D.G., 2004. Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints. International journal of computer vision 60, 91–110. [29] Luo, W., Qin, H., Chen, Z., Wang, L., Zheng, D., Li, Y., Liu, Y., Li, B., Hu, W., 2025. Visual-instructed degradation diffusion for all-in-one image restoration, in: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp. 12764–12777. [30] McGlamery, B., 1980. A computer model for underwater camera systems, in: Ocean Optics VI, SPIE. pp. 221–231. [31] Mei, H., Li, K., Liu, S., Ma, C., Jiang, Q., 2025. Dpf-net: Physical imaging model embedded data-driven underwater image enhance-ment. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 228, 679–693. [32] Peng, J., Liu, J., Zuo, X., Tao, Z., Wang, H., 2026. Bi-level inter-modality modulation for unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security . [33] Peng, L., Bian, L., 2025. Adaptive dual-domain learning for under-water image enhancement, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 6461–6469. [34] Peng, L., Zhu, C., Bian, L., 2023. U-shape transformer for underwater image enhancement. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 32, 3066–3079. [35] Pucci, R., Martinel, N., 2025. Ce-vae: Capsule enhanced variational autoencoder for underwater image enhancement, in: 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), IEEE. pp. 2113–2123. [36] Qi, Q., Zhang, Y., Tian, F., Wu, Q.J., Li, K., Luan, X., Song, D., 2021. Underwater image co-enhancement with correlation feature matching and joint learning. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 32, 1133–1147. [37] Ravi, N., Gabeur, V., Hu, Y.T., Hu, R., Ryali, C., Ma, T., Khedr, H., Rädle, R., Rolland, C., Gustafson, L., et al., 2024. Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714 . [38] Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., Ommer, B., 2022. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695. [39] Schechner, Y.Y., Karpel, N., 2005. Recovery of underwater visibility and structure by polarization analysis. IEEE Journal of oceanic engineering 30, 570–587. [40] Siméoni, O., Vo, H.V., Seitzer, M., Baldassarre, F., Oquab, M., Jose, C., Khalidov, V., Szafraniec, M., Yi, S., Ramamonjisoa, M., et al., 2025. Dinov3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10104 . [41] Straub, J., Whelan, T., Ma, L., Chen, Y., Wijmans, E., Green, S., Engel, J.J., Mur-Artal, R., Ren, C., Verma, S., et al., 2019. The replica dataset: A digital replica of indoor spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05797 . [42] Varghese, N., Kumar, A., Rajagopalan, A., 2023. Self-supervised monocular underwater depth recovery, image restoration, and a real-sea video dataset, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 12248–12258. [43] Wang, H., Chen, Y., Yao, M., Liu, Q., Jiang, G., Fu, X., 2026a. Tensorized parameter-free multi-view spectral clustering based on fair representation learning. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia . [44] Wang, H., Cui, L., Yao, M., Fu, X., 2026b. Tensorized fine-grained incomplete multiview clustering via intrinsic structure recovery. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems . [45] Wang, H., Zhang, W., Xu, Y., Li, H., Ren, P., 2025. Watercycledif-fusion: Visual-textual fusion empowered underwater image enhance-ment. Information Fusion , 103693. [46] Wang, W., Zhu, D., Wang, X., Hu, Y., Qiu, Y., Wang, C., Hu, Y., Kapoor, A., Scherer, S., 2020. Tartanair: A dataset to push the limits of visual slam, in: 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE. pp. 4909–4916. 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 19 of 20 Short Title of the Article 

[47] Xiao, Y., Yuan, Q., Jiang, K., Chen, Y., Wang, S., Lin, C.W., 2025. Multi-axis feature diversity enhancement for remote sensing video super-resolution. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing . [48] Xiao, Y., Yuan, Q., Jiang, K., He, J., Jin, X., Zhang, L., 2023. Ediffsr: An efficient diffusion probabilistic model for remote sensing image super-resolution. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 62, 1–14. [49] Xie, Y., Kong, L., Chen, K., Zheng, Z., Yu, X., Yu, Z., Zheng, B., 2024. Uveb: A large-scale benchmark and baseline towards real-world underwater video enhancement, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22358– 22367. [50] Yang, C., Zhang, L., Lu, H., Ruan, X., Yang, M.H., 2013. Saliency detection via graph-based manifold ranking, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3166–3173. [51] Ying, Z., Niu, H., Gupta, P., Mahajan, D., Ghadiyaram, D., Bovik, A., 2020. From patches to pictures (paq-2-piq): Mapping the perceptual space of picture quality, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3575–3585. [52] Zhang, W., Zhuang, P., Sun, H.H., Li, G., Kwong, S., Li, C., 2022. Underwater image enhancement via minimal color loss and locally adaptive contrast enhancement. IEEE Transactions on Image Pro-cessing 31, 3997–4010. [53] Zhao, C., Cai, W., Dong, C., Hu, C., 2024. Wavelet-based fourier in-formation interaction with frequency diffusion adjustment for under-water image restoration, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8281–8291. [54] Zheng, L., Liu, M., Zhang, S., Dong, S., 2025. A novel underwater target tracking method in uasns via collaborative deep reinforcement learning. Information Fusion , 103797. [55] Zhou, J., Sun, J., Li, C., Jiang, Q., Zhou, M., Lam, K.M., Zhang, W., Fu, X., 2024. Hclr-net: hybrid contrastive learning regularization with locally randomized perturbation for underwater image enhancement. International Journal of Computer Vision 132, 4132–4156. [56] Zhuang, P., Wu, J., Porikli, F., Li, C., 2022. Underwater image enhancement with hyper-laplacian reflectance priors. IEEE Trans-actions on Image Processing 31, 5442–5455. 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 20 of 20