Title: ChartSync: A Benchmark for Visuo-Logical Cascading Chart Editing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.10301v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 00:45:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
## ChartSync: A Benchmark for Visuo-Logical Cascading Chart Editing 

Jiakang Yu 1,2,*,† , Yixuan Chai 2,* , Tianci Wang 3, Rihui Jin 4, Guangkai Xu 5,Hongtao Deng 1,‡ , Xun Zhu 1, Wang Gao 1,‡ , Xinrun Guo 2, Haipang Wu 2

> 1

Jianghan University 2HiThink Research 

> 3

University of Science and Technology of China 

> 4

Southeast University 5Zhejiang University 

hongtaodeng@jhun.edu.cn, gaow@jhun.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Generative image editing models struggle with structured statistical charts when data modifi-cations require geometric synchronization. We formalize this task as Visuo-Logical Cascad-ing Editing (VLCE). However, existing meth-ods remain confined to localized text substi-tutions and struggle with dependency-aware cascading updates. To systematically evalu-ate this capability, we introduce ChartSync, an expert-validated benchmark constructed via a programmatic rendering pipeline that guaran-tees deterministic visuo-logical coupling for the ground truth. ChartSync comprises 870 triplets across 9 chart categories and 4 task types, in-cluding 235 geometry-coupled VLCE instances that specifically test cascading text-to-geometry synchronization. We further evaluate these in-stances via a two-tier framework combining objective visual metrics with a vision-language model judge paradigm to assess low-level fi-delity alongside multimodal comprehension and reasoning. Evaluating 14 image editing models and one code-mediated pipeline reveals a nuanced capability gap: most open-source models suffer severe drops in geometric syn-chronization, while only two frontier propri-etary models show emerging VLCE capability, with their residual errors mainly involving se-mantic isolation and background corruption. Our detailed error analysis deconstructs these failure paradigms to identify core meta-abilities for guiding future multimodal architectures. The ChartSync dataset and code are publicly released at https://github.com/kaka-yjk/ ChartSyncCodebase .

1 Introduction 

While instruction-based image editing has ad-vanced rapidly in natural scenes (Brooks et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2025; Pathiraja 

> *

Equal contribution. 

> †

Work done during an internship at HiThink Research. 

> ‡

Corresponding authors. Only text substitution Spatial alignment 

> Traditional Text Edit Our VLCE Requirement
> 35% 25% 35% 25% 30% 30% 30% 30%

Figure 1: An illustration of the VLCE task. While tradi-tional instruction-based editing merely substitutes text labels, our VLCE requirement demands a synchronous spatial alignment. 

et al., 2025; Ma et al., 2024), extending this to sta-tistical charts remains challenging due to precise text-geometry synchronization (Gui et al., 2025). Recent chart editing works often adopt a code-based paradigm, using intermediate scripts to avoid direct pixel generation (Zhao et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025b). However, this paradigm assumes source-code availability for flattened chart images and can suffer from information loss during reverse engineering (Yang et al., 2025a; Tang et al., 2025). This motivates direct pixel-space chart editing for real-world flattened chart images. Nevertheless, direct chart manipulation intro-duces challenges spanning multimodal comprehen-sion, reasoning, and generation. Even simple text modifications demand precise layout alignment to prevent visual corruption (Gui et al., 2025). Fur-thermore, unlike natural scenes that allow geomet-ric flexibility, chart geometries are governed by underlying data. As argued in (Li et al., 2025), chart editing is a structured transformation problem rather than generic image manipulation. We formal-arXiv:2607.10301v1 [cs.CV] 11 Jul 2026 Benchmark Domain Input at Inference Output / Target Core Evaluated Ability Value-to-Geometry Sync. Sync. Metric                                           

> OmniText (Gunawan et al., 2025) Visual text Image + mask + text/style Image Text content/style manipulation No No TextEditBench (Gui et al., 2025) Visual text Image + instruction Image Reasoning-aware text editing No No ChartEdit (Zhao et al., 2025) Chart Image or image + code + instruction Code / rendered image Code-level chart editing Partial No ChartM3 (Yang et al., 2025b) Chart Image + code + instruction Code / rendered image Target localization and code editing Partial No ChartE³ (Li et al., 2026) Chart Image + instruction Image End-to-end local/global chart editing Partial No ChartEditVista (Chen et al., 2026) Chart Image + instruction Code / rendered image Fine-grained layout/text fidelity Partial No
> ChartSync Chart Image + instruction Image Text-to-geometry cascading Yes Yes

Table 1: Comparison between ChartSync and related text/chart editing benchmarks. 

ize this task as Visuo-Logical Cascading Editing (VLCE), which requires synchronizing text mod-ifications with geometric adjustments. As shown in Figure 1, modifying a pie chart’s percentages requires adjusting the corresponding slices’ central angles. Unfortunately, most current generative edit-ing models are confined to localized literal substitu-tions, failing to grasp this underlying visuo-logical coupling. To fill this gap, we introduce ChartSync, an expert-validated benchmark for evaluating VLCE in statistical charts. ChartSync uses a program-matic rendering pipeline to ensure determinis-tic text-geometry coupling and integrates a two-tier evaluation framework covering textual fidelity, structural integrity, visuo-logical synchronization, and background preservation. Benchmarking 14 editing models plus a code-mediated pipeline re-veals that VLCE capability remains highly uneven: only two frontier proprietary models show strong text-to-geometry synchronization, while most open-source and several proprietary models still exhibit substantial cascading failures. Based on these failure patterns, we identify a hierarchy of meta-abilities to guide future multimodal architectures. In summary, our main contributions are as fol-lows: • We formally define the task of VLCE and introduce ChartSync, a focused diagnostic benchmark for direct chart editing, where the full dataset evaluates foundational chart per-ception and text manipulation, and the VLCE subset specifically probes dependency-aware cascading reasoning. • We develop a programmatic rendering pipeline to construct expert-validated edit-ing triplets, guaranteeing deterministic visuo-logical coupling and geometric precision for the ground-truth (GT) data. • We integrate an automated, two-tier evalua-tion framework combining objective visual metrics for low-level fidelity with a vision-language model (VLM) judge paradigm to assess complex multimodal comprehension and reasoning. • We evaluate 14 editing models and one code-mediated baseline, revealing distinct failure paradigms and identifying core meta-abilities for robust text-to-geometry chart editing. 

2 Related Works 

2.1 Instruction-based Image Editing 

Instruction-based image editing, pioneered by In-structPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023), allows users to modify images via natural language commands. This approach avoids explicit masks or detailed target descriptions (Hertz et al., 2022; Avrahami et al., 2022), and has been further extended with high-quality annotated datasets (Zhang et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2026) and multimodal visual guidance (Fu et al., 2024). However, current instruction-based editing mod-els focus on natural scenes and struggle with the rigid visual structures and data dependencies of sta-tistical charts (Zhao et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025b). Chart editing requires strict dependency-aware rea-soning for geometric synchronization, a challenge emphasized by recent studies (Yang et al., 2025a; Tang et al., 2025). Manipulating such structures demands models equipped with dependency-aware visuo-logical reasoning to achieve geometric syn-chronization, alongside strict semantic isolation to preserve background integrity. These represent crit-ical needs echoed by recent efforts (He et al., 2025; Dai et al., 2026). 

2.2 Text and Chart Editing Benchmarks 

Recent text-centric benchmarks evaluate fine-grained textual manipulation in images. Omni-Text (Gunawan et al., 2025) studies controllable text-image manipulation, including text removal, insertion, editing, rescaling, repositioning, and style control. TextEditBench (Gui et al., 2025) fur-ther evaluates reasoning-aware text editing across diverse visual documents with criteria such as text accuracy, visual consistency, layout preservation, Dataset       

> bar pie box errorbar graph radar errorpoint multidiff PIP
> Chart Types

VLCE Task Evaluation         

> Data Composition
> Original Image Instruction GT Image
> 50
> Q2
> Predicted Image
> 40
> Q2
> "Change the Q2 value from '40' to '50' , and adjust the corresponding bar height ."
> Instruction Original Image Generative Model
> Textual Content Consistency
> Objective Visual Metrics
> VLM as a Judge Structural Integrity Textual Edit Success Visuo-Logical Consistency Background Fidelity
> Input Output

Figure 2: An overview of ChartSync, consisting of a dataset, a VLCE task formulation, and an evaluation framework. 

and semantic expectation. These works highlight the difficulty of editing embedded text under style and layout constraints, but do not target chart-specific data-to-geometry dependencies. Chart editing has also received increasing at-tention. ChartEdit (Zhao et al., 2025) evaluates MLLMs on chart editing through code genera-tion, with both chart-level and code-level evalu-ation. ChartM3 (Yang et al., 2025b) introduces multimodal chart editing with textual descriptions and visual indicators, requiring models to associate highlighted chart regions with code-level elements. More recently, ChartE 3 (Li et al., 2026) proposes an end-to-end chart editing benchmark covering both local appearance edits and global data-centric transformations. ChartEditVista (Chen et al., 2026) further scales chart editing to thousands of image-instruction samples without requiring original chart code as input, and proposes fine-grained layout and text metrics. Despite these advances, existing benchmarks pri-marily evaluate text manipulation, target localiza-tion, code-level edit correctness, layout fidelity, tex-tual fidelity, or overall chart editing faithfulness. They do not explicitly isolate value-to-geometry synchronization as the core evaluation target, where a textual value update must trigger a coupled ge-ometric deformation in the rendered chart. Chart-Sync is therefore positioned as a focused diagnostic benchmark for pixel-space VLCE: it uses image-only editing inputs, constructs deterministic GT through programmatic rendering, and introduces VLCS to directly evaluate whether the edited ge-ometry is synchronized with the requested textual value change. Table 1 summarizes this distinction. 

3 ChartSync 

As depicted in Figure 2, ChartSync consists of three components: a curated dataset, a formal task for-mulation of VLCE, and an evaluation framework. 

3.1 Task Definition 

Formally, we define a structured chart as a visuo-logical graph C = ( V, G, S ), where V = {vi}

denotes textual or numerical values, G = {gj }

denotes geometric primitives, and S captures the dependency between value changes and geomet-ric deformations. The visuo-logical constraint is defined as: 

∆G = S(∆ V ). (1) Given an original chart image Iori and an in-struction Tinst specifying ∆V , an editing model generates: 

Ipred = M(Iori , T inst ). (2) A valid VLCE output satisfies three conditions: 1) textual realization, where the target values reflect 

∆V ; 2) geometric synchronization, where geom-etry follows ∆G = S(∆ V ); and 3) non-target preservation, where unedited elements remain un-changed. Thus, unlike standard instruction-based editing, VLCE requires models to infer and apply Fail Feedback   

> Code Generator
> Chart Corpus
> Original Code
> Instruction Proposer Original Image
> Instruction Evaluator
> Render
> Resolution Filter
> review judge
> Initial Instruction
> Human Curation & Sample
> Initial Dataset
> Fail Feedback Pass
> Logic Validator
> review judge
> Initial Edited Code
> Initial Edited Image
> Pass Render
> Final Dataset
> Phase1:Semantic Instruction Synthesis Phase3:Expert-Driven Quality Assurance Phase2:Code-Driven Chart Generation
> Proposal Instruction Generated Code Only Code
> Only Image Image & Code Think
> Code

Figure 3: The three-stage data construction pipeline of ChartSync. Phase 1 generates and evaluates initial editing instructions, Phase 2 produces GT images through code modification and logic validation, and Phase 3 performs expert quality assurance. 

data-to-graphic dependencies rather than merely modifying visible text. 

3.2 Data Construction 

As illustrated in Figure 3, we design a three-stage pipeline integrating automated generation with hu-man curation, utilizing original rendering codes from ChartMimic (Yang et al., 2025a). 

Phase 1: Semantic Instruction Synthesis. AVLM-based Instruction Proposer first extracts semantic key-value pairs to generate initial instruc-tions. Subsequently, an Instruction Evaluator 

filters proposals based on format, localizability, and training value. The evaluator intentionally re-tains localized text-only edits that implicitly in-volve chart dependencies, such as altering a nu-merical value without specifying its corresponding geometric scaling, thereby requiring downstream agents to infer the implicit cascading transforma-tion. 

Phase 2: Code-Driven Chart Generation. A

Code Generator powered by a Large Language Model (LLM) modifies the Python scripts with min-imal edits while triggering causally related struc-tural updates. A Logic Validator forms a feedback loop with the generator to verify syntax validity and instruction alignment. Inconsistent cases are itera-tively corrected before rendering the final ground-truth images Igt .

Phase 3: Expert-Driven Quality Assurance. 

An automated Resolution Filter removes samples whose rendered resolutions are inconsistent with the original images. Three artificial intelligence do-main experts independently inspect each remaining triplet and its corresponding code under a unani-mous acceptance protocol. Detected errors, arti-facts, or ambiguities are corrected through instruc-tion refinement and chart re-rendering. After qual-ity control and stratified sampling, we retain 870 expert-validated instances with unambiguous in-structions and unique target images. Detailed ex-pert qualifications, QA protocols, correction statis-tics, and retention statistics are provided in Ap-pendix A. 

3.3 Dataset Statistics 

To cover diverse data analysis scenarios, the dataset spans 9 chart categories and 4 progressively chal-lenging task types, as depicted in Figure 4. Detailed dataset statistics are provided in Appendix B. Regarding visual domains, ChartSync covers both standard statistical charts and advanced com-posite layouts. Standard formats include bar charts, box plots, errorpoint charts, graphs, radar charts, errorbar charts, and pie charts, while advanced lay-outs include Plot-in-Plot (PIP) and multidiff charts radar  

> 8.0% pie
> 4.6%
> multidiff
> 9.2%
> graph
> 8.0%
> errorbar
> 4.6%
> errorpoint
> 8.0%
> box
> 11.5%
> bar
> 34.5%
> PIP
> 11.5%
> single text
> 68.0%
> multiple text
> 4.9%
> single VLCE
> 20.6%
> multiple VLCE
> 6.4%

Figure 4: Data distribution of chart categories and task types in ChartSync. 

to evaluate models under dense and structured vi-sual conditions. Tasks are categorized into four types: single text edit , multiple text edit , single VLCE , and multiple VLCE , explicitly decoupling element quantity from structural updates. Text-only tasks evaluate founda-tional chart comprehension and text manipulation, while VLCE tasks require models to infer value-geometry dependencies and perform synchronized updates. Among the 870 triplets, 235 are geometry-coupled VLCE instances, including 179 single VLCE and 56 multiple VLCE samples. There-fore, the full dataset evaluates direct chart editing broadly, whereas cascading reasoning claims are based specifically on the VLCE subset. 

3.4 Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate VLCE via a two-tier framework com-bining objective visual metrics with a VLM-as-a-Judge paradigm, as illustrated in Figure 2. 

3.4.1 Objective Visual Metrics 

This component measures textual and structural fi-delity using character-level and pixel-level metrics. 

OCR F1 for Textual Content Consistency. 

We evaluate full-image textual fidelity using a character-level F1 score computed from text se-quences extracted via Optical Character Recogni-tion (OCR). Specifically, we normalize predicted and GT texts by removing whitespace and lower-casing, then compute character-level precision and recall based on the longest common subsequence between them. The final F1 score is computed as the harmonic mean of character-level precision and recall. This metric captures both correct text edit-ing and preservation of unchanged textual content. 

SSIM for Structural Integrity. The Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) (Wang et al., 2004) mea-sures global visual consistency between Ipred and 

Igt across luminance, contrast, and structure, cap-turing structural changes and potential artifacts in non-edited regions. 

3.4.2 VLM as a Judge 

While objective metrics capture low-level fidelity, they are insufficient for evaluating complex mul-timodal comprehension and reasoning. Therefore, we introduce a VLM-as-a-Judge paradigm, where a proprietary VLM performs holistic evaluation given the triplet [Original, GT, Prediction] .

TESR for Textual Edit Success. Textual Edit Success Rate (TESR) is a discrete score in 

{0.0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0} that measures the ex-ecution of the instructed text modification, eval-uating both OCR-level semantic correctness and spatial precision. 

VLCS for Visuo-Logical Consistency. For sin-gle VLCE and multiple VLCE tasks, Visuo-Logical Consistency Score (VLCS) evaluates whether the edited visual elements correctly reflect the un-derlying data modifications. Scored discretely in {0.0, 0.25 , 0.5, 1.0}, this metric focuses exclu-sively on the geometric regions directly coupled to the edited text, penalizing models that fail to syn-chronize data values with visual representations. 

BFS for Background Fidelity. Background Fi-delity Score (BFS) measures the preservation of unmodified chart components. Scored discretely in {0.0, 0.25 , 0.5, 0.75 , 1.0}, it explicitly assesses untargeted areas for visual artifacts, color shifts, or structural collapse, capturing global layout coher-ence. To aggregate these insights, VLM Avg is com-puted as the macro-average of the three VLM-derived metric means. TESR and BFS are com-puted over all applicable samples, while VLCS is evaluated only on the 235 VLCE instances without assigning scores to text-only samples. The Over-all Score is the equal average of five metric-level scores: OCR F1, SSIM, TESR, VLCS, and BFS, and should be interpreted as a metric-level sum-mary rather than a sample-level average. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

All experiments are conducted on NVIDIA A100 GPUs. We evaluate 14 instruction-based image editing models to assess their VLCE capabilities, covering both proprietary and open-source image Model Objective Visual Metrics VLM as a Judge VLM Avg Overall OCR F 1 SSIM TESR VLCS BFS                                                                                                          

> Code-Mediated Pipeline 88.76 54.83 93.38 28.51 37.44 53.11 60.58
> Proprietary Models
> Qwen-Image-2.0-Pro (Zhao et al., 2026) 78.24 91.30 74.05 24.26 59.83 52.71 65.54 SeeDream-5.0-Lite (Seedream et al., 2025) 85.30 77.29 85.61 37.66 69.60 64.29 71.09 Wan2.7-Image-Pro (Mao et al., 2026) 81.16 79.68 82.62 56.38 72.50 70.50 74.47 GPT-Image-2 183.88 81.34 88.90 74.47 80.29 81.22 81.78 Nano Banana Pro 286.02 83.20 96.25 83.71 89.60 89.85 87.76
> Open-Source Models
> DeepGen-1.0 (Wang et al., 2026) 43.51 26.21 13.72 8.72 25.89 16.11 23.61 Intern-VL-U (Tian et al., 2026) 49.66 24.17 25.91 12.02 24.14 20.69 27.18 Step1X-Edit-v1p2 (Liu et al., 2025) 64.79 77.37 27.24 10.43 49.68 29.12 45.90 LongCat-Image-Edit (Team et al., 2025) 62.90 74.66 36.39 13.19 49.11 32.90 47.25 FLUX.2-Klein-Base-9B (Labs, 2025) 72.18 69.28 43.47 12.55 55.60 37.21 50.62 FireRed-Image-Edit-1.0 (Team et al., 2026) 71.39 76.28 48.09 12.02 50.29 36.80 51.61 FireRed-Image-Edit-1.1 (Team et al., 2026) 74.09 77.58 60.23 12.77 56.41 43.14 56.22 Qwen-Image-Edit (Wu et al., 2025) 65.63 78.36 43.54 11.49 54.71 36.58 50.75 Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 (Wu et al., 2025) 76.93 90.02 61.81 13.83 58.88 44.84 60.29

Table 2: Results of 14 image editing models and one code-mediated pipeline on the ChartSync benchmark. 

editing models. In addition, we include a code-mediated baseline to examine whether a chart-to-code paradigm can solve ChartSync when the orig-inal source code is unavailable. This pipeline first reconstructs executable plotting code from the in-put chart image using a VLM, then edits the re-constructed code according to the instruction, and finally re-renders the edited chart. The resulting image is evaluated under the same ChartSync pro-tocol as direct image editing models. We apply a direct prompting strategy, providing the models with the original chart image and direct instructions. Comprehensive hyperparameter configurations for all evaluated baselines, as well as the LLMs and VLMs utilized in our automated pipeline, are de-tailed in Appendix C. Additionally, the exact sys-tem prompts guiding the data construction and the VLM-as-a-Judge evaluation are provided in Ap-pendix D. 

4.2 Main Results 

Table 2 presents the quantitative performance of 14 image editing models and one code-mediated pipeline on ChartSync, yielding several key find-ings.     

> 1https://developers.openai.com/api/ docs/models/gpt-image-2 .Model identifier:
> gpt-image-2-2026-04-21 . Accessed July 2026.
> 2https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/ models/gemini-3-pro-image .Model identifier:
> gemini-3-pro-image . Accessed July 2026.

Severe Failure in Cascading Updates. A sharp performance degradation occurs when models tran-sition from localized text modifications to geomet-ric synchronization. Across the benchmark, most models exhibit a substantial gap between TESR and VLCS. For example, Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 achieves a TESR of 61.81 but plummets to a VLCS of 13.83. This discrepancy demonstrates that cur-rent generative editing methods remain largely con-fined to localized literal substitutions, failing to comprehend the underlying data logic or propagate textual modifications into geometric synchroniza-tion. 

Code-Mediated Editing Is Not a Free Solution. 

The code-mediated baseline achieves high OCR F1

and TESR scores of 88.76 and 93.38, indicating that chart-to-code reconstruction followed by code editing can often perform textual modifications. However, its SSIM, VLCS, and BFS drop to 54.83, 28.51, and 37.44, respectively, revealing substan-tial information loss during image-to-code recon-struction. These results show that code-mediated pipelines remain limited when source code is un-available, motivating direct pixel-space chart edit-ing for real-world scenarios. 

Frontier Models Show Emerging VLCE Capa-bility. The VLCS results reveal a more nuanced picture than a simple proprietary-versus-open-source dichotomy. Nano Banana Pro and GPT-Image-2 achieve strong VLCS scores of 83.71 and Figure 5: Performance comparison between Nano Banana Pro and Qwen-Image-Edit-2511. The left panel illustrates the overall scores across 9 chart categories, while the right panel details the performance breakdown by task complexity. 

74.47, respectively, indicating emerging capabil-ity in text-to-geometry synchronization. However, the remaining proprietary models still range from 24.26 to 56.38, and the best open-source model, Qwen-Image-Edit-2511, reaches only 13.83. This suggests that reliable VLCE is not a general prop-erty of proprietary models, but is currently concen-trated in a few frontier systems. 

The Illusion of Structural Fidelity. While high SSIM suggests global layout preservation, BFS reveals an illusion of structural fidelity. Despite SSIM values exceeding 90 for Qwen-Image-2.0-Pro and Qwen-Image-Edit-2511, most models yield moderate BFS scores, with open-source mod-els averaging around 50. This discrepancy arises from a deficit in fine-grained semantic comprehen-sion. Without precise structural grounding, these baselines struggle to accurately isolate the target text and its coupled geometries. Consequently, their edits frequently bleed into untargeted regions, causing collateral damage to essential structures such as axes, gridlines, or adjacent data marks. 

5 Analysis and Discussion 

5.1 Performance Across Chart Categories and Task Complexity 

To understand how visual structures influence edit-ing capabilities, we compare Nano Banana Pro and Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 across chart categories, as illustrated in Figure 5. While the proprietary model maintains robust performance across categories, the open-source model exhibits larger fluctuations, particularly on bar, pie, and multidiff charts. These results highlight the difficulty of dependency-aware geometric synchronization and semantic isolation in complex chart structures. Regarding task complexity, increasing editing elements from single to multiple causes only 31.1% 58.1% 10.8% 38.1% 20.2% 41.7%  

> VLI TMF BC
> (a) Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 (b) Nano Banana Pro

Figure 6: Distribution of primary error occurrences within the VLCE subset. 

marginal degradation for both models. This sug-gests that multi-target editing is not the primary bottleneck; instead, geometric synchronization re-mains the dominant challenge. 

5.2 Error Analysis and Meta-Abilities 

To isolate critical bottlenecks in generative chart editing, we conduct a representative diagnostic comparison between the top-performing open-source baseline, Qwen-Image-Edit-2511, and the leading proprietary model, Nano Banana Pro, within the VLCE subset. This analysis character-izes representative failure modes rather than pro-viding an exhaustive taxonomy over all models. As illustrated in Figure 6, we treat the evaluation of degraded images as a multi-label classification task and categorize all observed error occurrences into three distinct types. Textual Manipulation Failure (TMF) occurs when a model fails to accurately lo-cate or render the target text. Visuo-Logical Incon-sistency (VLI) arises when numerical text changes fail to propagate to the associated quantitative ge-ometry. Background Corruption (BC) represents cases where untargeted background elements are corrupted despite correct target editing. For Qwen-Image-Edit-2511, TMF at 58.1 and VLI at 31.1 dominate the errors, indicating failures in both text rendering and dependency-aware synchronization. In contrast, Nano Banana Pro largely overcomes foundational text failures, with remaining errors concentrated on BC at 41.7 and VLI at 38.1. Drawing insights from these distinct failure paradigms, we deconstruct the model requirements into three hierarchical meta-abilities. First, foun-dation perception entails semantic grounding to map abstract instructions to specific visual ob-jects, coupled with spatial layout awareness to pre-vent modified elements from overlapping with sur-rounding visual components. Second, synchro-nization and reasoning enables cascading editing through visual-quantitative alignment between nu-merical changes and geometric updates, together with structural reasoning over causally related el-ements. Third, high-fidelity generation requires artifact-free rendering, geometric preservation, and semantic isolation to prevent visual bleeding during localized edits. To further illustrate these failure modes, Ap-pendix E provides four qualitative scenarios. Specifically, case 1 demonstrates the breakdown of foundational perception through catastrophic TMF and structural disintegration. Next, case 2 illustrates the synchronization and reasoning bottle-neck, highlighting how absolute VLI renders open-source graphics entirely static while proprietary baselines achieve precise text-geometry synchro-nization. Furthermore, case 3 illustrates a residual high-fidelity generation failure, showing that se-mantic isolation can still break down in specific cases even when literal text edits are correctly ex-ecuted. Finally, case 4 marks the non-saturated boundary of the benchmark, revealing divergent ge-ometric scaling errors when architectures encounter highly coupled visual-data dependencies. 

5.3 Correlation With Human Evaluation 

To validate the reliability of our two-tier evaluation framework, we conduct a blind human evaluation on 200 generated results sampled across different models. Three independent experts assess each prediction on a 0–100 scale based on criteria cov-ering textual fidelity, geometric synchronization, and background preservation. We compute the Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC) to mea-sure inter-annotator agreement, achieving an over-all ICC of 0.87, indicating high consistency among human judgments. We average the expert scores as the final human judgments and compute the Pearson correlation coefficient r and Spearman’s rank correlation ρ

against our automated metrics. As presented in Ta-ble 3, all automated metrics demonstrate strong pos-itive correlations with human assessments at a sig-nificance level of p < 0.001 . Notably, the VLM-as-a-Judge metrics exhibit significantly higher align-ment than traditional objective metrics. In par-ticular, VLCS achieves the highest correlation of 

r = 0 .892 , indicating that VLCS effectively cap-tures human-perceived geometric synchronization quality. These results indicate that our VLM-as-a-Judge protocol is not used as an unvalidated oracle, but is calibrated against blind human annotations.                

> Metric Pearson ( r)Spearman ( ρ)
> OCR F 10.814 0.795 SSIM 0.695 0.688 TESR 0.867 0.852 VLCS 0.892 0.884 BFS 0.845 0.830
> Overall Score 0.915 0.903
> Table 3: Correlation between our automated multi-dimensional evaluation metrics and human expert judg-ments.

6 Conclusion 

In this research, we introduced ChartSync, abenchmark evaluating generative models on VLCE within statistical charts. We constructed 870 expert-validated editing triplets using a rigorous program-matic rendering pipeline. Alongside this dataset, we integrated an automated, two-tier evaluation framework that decouples low-level visual fidelity from complex multimodal comprehension and rea-soning. Our evaluation of 14 image editing mod-els and one code-mediated pipeline exposes a nu-anced capability landscape: most models remain severely bottlenecked by foundational text render-ing and dependency-aware reasoning, while only a few frontier proprietary models show strong cas-cading synchronization, with semantic isolation remaining a residual failure mode in some cases. By deconstructing these distinct failure paradigms into core meta-abilities, we anticipate ChartSync will serve as a critical catalyst for advancing robust structural document understanding and guiding the development of future multimodal architectures ca-pable of precise geometric synchronization. Limitations 

Our work presents five primary limitations: (1) Reliance on “VLM-as-a-Judge”: While highly scal-able, this paradigm may introduce subtle biases or inaccuracies compared to strict human evalua-tion. Future work could incorporate multi-judge ensembles or cross-family judge models to further reduce evaluator-specific preferences and improve robustness. (2) Focus on standard statistical charts: Extending this framework to more complex doc-ument scenarios remains an open and important direction to explore. (3) Limited dataset scale: De-veloping a larger evaluation benchmark in the fu-ture could help uncover more nuanced findings and comprehensively evaluate multimodal editing archi-tectures. (4) Limited scope of error taxonomy: our detailed error analysis focuses on two representa-tive models to diagnose major failure modes, rather than exhaustively categorizing all 14 evaluated im-age editing models. A full model-wise taxonomy is an important direction for future analysis. (5) For proprietary models, full training-data auditing is impossible, and we therefore cannot completely rule out exposure to similar chart-related editing patterns. 

Acknowledgments 

This work is supported by National Natural Sci-ence Foundation of China (NSFC, No.62276196), Industry-University-Research Project of Wuhan Education Bureau (No.CXY202208) and The Research Fund of Jianghan University (Grant No.2022XKZK10). 

References 

Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. 2022. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of natural images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 18208–18218. Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. 2023. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image edit-ing instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-tion , pages 18392–18402. Liangyu Chen, Yichen Xu, Jianzhe Ma, Yuqi Liu, Donglu Yang, Liang Zhang, Zihao Yue, Wenxuan Wang, and Qin Jin. 2026. Charteditor: A reinforce-ment learning framework for robust chart editing. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 40, pages 20199–20207. Xuanlang Dai, Yujie Zhou, Long Xing, Jiazi Bu, Xilin Wei, Yuhong Liu, Beichen Zhang, Kai Chen, and Yuhang Zang. 2026. Endocot: Scaling endoge-nous chain-of-thought reasoning in diffusion models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.12252 .Tsu-Jui Fu, Wenze Hu, Xianzhi Du, William Wang, Yinfei Yang, and Zhe Gan. 2024. Guiding instruction-based image editing via multimodal large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 54820–54833. Rui Gui, Yang Wan, Haochen Han, Dongxing Mao, Fangming Liu, Min Li, and Alex Jinpeng Wang. 2025. Texteditbench: Evaluating reasoning-aware text editing beyond rendering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.16270 .Agus Gunawan, Samuel Teodoro, Yun Chen, Soo Ye Kim, Jihyong Oh, and Munchurl Kim. 2025. Omnitext: A training-free generalist for control-lable text-image manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24093 .Zefeng He, Xiaoye Qu, Yafu Li, Tong Zhu, Siyuan Huang, and Yu Cheng. 2025. Diffthinker: Towards generative multimodal reasoning with diffusion mod-els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.24165 .Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aber-man, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2022. Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626 .Black Forest Labs. 2025. FLUX.2: Frontier Visual Intelligence. https://bfl.ai/blog/flux-2 .Shawn Li, Ryan Rossi, Sungchul Kim, Sunav Choudhary, Franck Dernoncourt, Puneet Mathur, Zhengzhong Tu, and Yue Zhao. 2025. Charts are not images: On the challenges of scientific chart edit-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.00752 .Shuo Li, Jiajun Sun, Zhekai Wang, Xiaoran Fan, Hui Li, Dingwen Yang, Zhiheng Xi, Yijun Wang, Zifei Shan, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, and Xuanjing Huang. 2026. Charte 3: A comprehensive benchmark for end-to-end chart editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21694 .Shiyu Liu, Yucheng Han, Peng Xing, Fukun Yin, Rui Wang, Wei Cheng, Jiaqi Liao, Yingming Wang, Honghao Fu, Chunrui Han, Guopeng Li, Yuang Peng, Quan Sun, Jingwei Wu, Yan Cai, Zheng Ge, Ranchen Ming, Lei Xia, Xianfang Zeng, and 5 others. 2025. Step1x-edit: A practical framework for general im-age editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.17761 .Yiwei Ma, Jiayi Ji, Ke Ye, Weihuang Lin, Zhibin Wang, Yonghan Zheng, Qiang Zhou, Xiaoshuai Sun, and Rongrong Ji. 2024. I2ebench: A comprehensive benchmark for instruction-based image editing. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:41494–41516. Chaojie Mao, Chen-Wei Xie, Chongyang Zhong, Haoyou Deng, Jiaxing Zhao, Jie Xiao, Jinbo Xing, Jingfeng Zhang, Jingren Zhou, Jingyi Zhang, and 1 others. 2026. Wan-image: Pushing the bound-aries of generative visual intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.19858 .Yulin Pan, Xiangteng He, Chaojie Mao, Zhen Han, Zey-inzi Jiang, Jingfeng Zhang, and Yu Liu. 2025. Ice-bench: A unified and comprehensive benchmark for image creating and editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 16586–16596. Bimsara Pathiraja, Maitreya Patel, Shivam Singh, Yezhou Yang, and Chitta Baral. 2025. Refedit: A benchmark and method for improving instruction-based image editing model on referring expressions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-ference on Computer Vision , pages 15646–15656. Team Seedream, Yunpeng Chen, Yu Gao, Lixue Gong, Meng Guo, Qiushan Guo, Zhiyao Guo, Xiaoxia Hou, Weilin Huang, Yixuan Huang, and 1 others. 2025. Seedream 4.0: Toward next-generation multimodal image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20427 .Jiahao Tang, Henry Hengyuan Zhao, Lijian Wu, Zijian Zhang, Yifei Tao, Dongxing Mao, Yang Wan, Jingru Tan, Min Zeng, Min Li, and 1 others. 2025. From charts to code: A hierarchical benchmark for multi-modal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.17932 .Meituan LongCat Team, Hanghang Ma, Haoxian Tan, Jiale Huang, Junqiang Wu, Jun-Yan He, Lishuai Gao, Songlin Xiao, Xiaoming Wei, Xiaoqi Ma, and 1 oth-ers. 2025. Longcat-image technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.07584 .Super Intelligence Team, Changhao Qiao, Chao Hui, Chen Li, Cunzheng Wang, Dejia Song, Jiale Zhang, Jing Li, Qiang Xiang, Runqi Wang, and 1 others. 2026. Firered-image-edit-1.0 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.13344 .Changyao Tian, Danni Yang, Guanzhou Chen, Erfei Cui, Zhaokai Wang, Yuchen Duan, Penghao Yin, Sitao Chen, Ganlin Yang, Mingxin Liu, and 1 others. 2026. Internvl-u: Democratizing unified multimodal models for understanding, reasoning, generation and editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.09877 .Dianyi Wang, Ruihang Li, Feng Han, Chaofan Ma, Wei Song, Siyuan Wang, Yibin Wang, Yi Xin, Hongjian Liu, Zhixiong Zhang, and 1 others. 2026. Deepgen 1.0: A lightweight unified multimodal model for ad-vancing image generation and editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12205 .Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. 2004. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transac-tions on image processing , 13(4):600–612. Chenfei Wu, Jiahao Li, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kaiyuan Gao, Kun Yan, Sheng-ming Yin, Shuai Bai, Xiao Xu, Yilei Chen, and 1 others. 2025. Qwen-image technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02324 .Cheng Yang, Chufan Shi, Yaxin Liu, Bo Shui, Junjie Wang, Mohan Jing, Linran Xu, Xinyu Zhu, Siheng Li, Yuxiang Zhang, and 1 others. 2025a. Chartmimic: Evaluating lmm’s cross-modal reasoning capability via chart-to-code generation. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 26590–26646. Donglu Yang, Liang Zhang, Zihao Yue, Liangyu Chen, Yichen Xu, Wenxuan Wang, and Qin Jin. 2025b. Chartm3: Benchmarking chart editing with multi-modal instructions. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pages 5001– 5009. Yang Ye, Xianyi He, Zongjian Li, Shenghai Yuan, Zhiyuan Yan, Bohan Hou, Li Yuan, and 1 others. 2026. Imgedit: A unified image editing dataset and benchmark. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 38. Kai Zhang, Lingbo Mo, Wenhu Chen, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. 2023. Magicbrush: A manually annotated dataset for instruction-guided image editing. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,36:31428–31449. Bing Zhao, Chenfei Wu, Deqing Li, Hao Meng, Jiahao Li, Jie Zhang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kaiyuan Gao, Kuan Cao, Kun Yan, Liang Peng, Lihan Jiang, Niantong Li, Ningyuan Tang, Shengming Yin, Tianhe Wu, Xiao Xu, Xiaoyue Chen, and 56 others. 2026. Qwen-image-2.0 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.10730 .Xuanle Zhao, Xuexin Liu, Yang Haoyue, Xianzhen Luo, Fanhu Zeng, Jianling Li, Qi Shi, and Chi Chen. 2025. ChartEdit: How far are MLLMs from automating chart analysis? evaluating MLLMs’ capability via chart editing. In Findings of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 3616–3630, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. 

A Expert Quality Assurance 

The final candidate triplets were not accepted solely by the LLM-based logic validator. After code-level generation and automatic logic validation, 935 can-didate triplets entered the expert quality assurance stage. Three Ph.D.-level AI researchers indepen-dently inspected each candidate triplet and its cor-responding code. The experts checked whether the instruction was unambiguous, whether the tar-get text was correctly modified, whether the cou-pled geometric update was consistent with the data change, and whether the rendered GT image con-tained visual artifacts or unintended layout shifts. Item Value         

> Expert-QA candidates 935 Experts 3 Ph.D QA protocol Unanimous accept Initially flagged candidates 258 Correction rate 27.6% Pairwise expert agreement 95.4% Final retained triplets 870 Final retention rate 93.0%
> Table 4: Expert quality assurance statistics for Chart-Sync construction.

We adopted a unanimous-accept protocol: atriplet was retained only when all three experts agreed that the instruction, edited code, and ren-dered GT image were valid. In the initial QA pass, 258 candidate triplets were flagged for further cor-rection, corresponding to a correction rate of 27.6%. The average pairwise agreement among the experts was 95.4%. Flagged candidates were manually cor-rected through instruction refinement, code adjust-ment, and chart re-rendering. After expert curation and stratified sampling, we retained 870 expert-validated triplets, corresponding to a final retention rate of 93.0%. The detailed QA statistics are sum-marized in Table 4. 

B Detailed Dataset Statistics 

This appendix provides the precise quantitative breakdown of the ChartSync dataset. Tables 5 and 6 detail the distributions of the 870 expert-curated editing triplets, independently categorized by the nine distinct chart types and the four task types. The category distribution balances common statis-tical charts and complex composite layouts, while the task distribution covers both foundational text manipulation and geometry-coupled VLCE reason-ing. This controlled design ensures broad struc-tural diversity and enables systematic evaluation of VLCE capabilities. Bar charts constitute the largest subset because they are among the most prevalent statistical visu-alizations and provide a representative setting for evaluating value-to-geometry dependencies. The remaining chart categories cover diverse visual structures, including statistical distributions, rela-tional graphs, and composite layouts such as PIP and multidiff charts. The task distribution separates textual manipula-tion complexity from dependency-aware geometric reasoning. Text-only tasks evaluate foundational 

Chart Category Count 

Bar 300 PIP 100 Box 100 Multidiff 80 Errorpoint 70 Graph 70 Radar 70 Errorbar 40 Pie 40 

Total 870 

> Table 5: Triplet distribution by chart category.

Task Type Count 

Single Text Edit 592 Single VLCE 179 Multiple Text Edit 43 Multiple VLCE 56 

Total 870 

> Table 6: Triplet distribution by task complexity.

chart comprehension and text editing ability, while VLCE tasks require models to infer value-geometry dependencies and perform synchronized updates. The controlled allocation across task types avoids excessive concentration on a single editing pattern and supports systematic evaluation of cascading reasoning capability. 

C Model Configurations 

C.1 Baseline Inference Configurations 

In this section, we detail the hyperparameter con-figurations for all baseline models evaluated on ChartSync. To ensure a fair and reproducible com-parison, we strictly adhere to the default parameter settings officially recommended by the respective authors or technical reports. For open-source diffusion-based models, we pri-marily configure two critical hyperparameters: the Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) scale and the num-ber of denoising inference steps, as summarized in Table 7. For proprietary models accessed via API, we utilize their default black-box inference settings to reflect their standard performance in real-world applications. For the code-mediated baseline, we use GPT-5.5 1 to perform image-to-code recon-struction, instruction-guided code editing, and re-rendering, and evaluate the final rendered images under the same ChartSync protocol.                     

> Model Guidance Scale Steps
> FireRed-Image-Edit-1.0 4.0 40 FireRed-Image-Edit-1.1 4.0 40 Qwen-Image-Edit 4.0 40 Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 4.0 40 Intern-VL-U 3.5 / 1.5 †20 LongCat-Image-Edit 4.5 50 Step1X-Edit-v1p2 6.0 50 DeepGen-1.0 4.0 50 FLUX.2-Klein-Base-9B 4.0 50

Table 7: Inference configurations for open-source mod-els. †Intern-VL-U employs a Dual-Guidance CFG mechanism to decouple image reference and text in-struction. 

C.2 Data Construction and Evaluation Configurations 

In addition to the baseline models, we specify the configurations for the LLMs and VLMs uti-lized throughout our automated data construction pipeline and the VLM-as-a-Judge evaluation frame-work. For these reasoning-intensive tasks, we pri-marily adjust the sampling temperature to balance generation diversity and logical rigor. The detailed settings are summarized in Table 8.               

> Role Model Temperature
> Instruction Proposer GPT-5.4 1.0 Instruction Evaluator GPT-5.4 1.0 Code Generator GPT-5.4 0.2 Logic Validator GPT-5.4 0.1 OCR Extractor GPT-5.4 0.0 Judge Gemini-3.1-Pro 0.1

Table 8: Model configurations for data construction and evaluation. Higher temperatures encourage diversity in instruction synthesis, while lower temperatures ensure deterministic reasoning during logic validation and eval-uation. 

D Prompts 

D.1 Data Generation Prompts 

We present the exact system prompts used in our data construction pipeline as follows. For phase 1, the prompts for the Instruction Proposer and the 

> 1https://developers.openai.com/api/docs/ models/gpt-5.5

Instruction Evaluator are detailed in Figure 7 and Figure 8, respectively. For phase 2, the prompts for the Code Generator and the Logic Validator are provided in Figure 9 and Figure 10, respectively. 

D.2 OCR Extraction Prompt 

The following prompt is used by the GPT-5.4-based OCR extractor to obtain full-image text content for OCR F 1 computation, as shown in Figure 11. 

D.3 Judge Prompts 

The VLM-as-a-Judge framework evaluates predic-tions across three dimensions: textual edit success, visuo-logical consistency, and background fidelity. These three metrics use different discrete score sets because they capture different forms of par-tial correctness. TESR adopts six levels since tex-tual editing allows fine-grained partial success: the target text may be semantically correct while dif-fering in position, size, alignment, or multi-target coverage. BFS adopts five levels because back-ground preservation degrades more continuously, from minor artifacts or color shifts to localized corruption, large-area structural damage, or com-plete layout collapse. In contrast, VLCS adopts four levels because it evaluates a stricter data-to-graphic synchronization criterion. A score of 1.0 requires all target geometries to change in the cor-rect direction and strictly match the GT magnitude or shape; 0.5 captures partial correctness; 0.25 in-dicates a correct-direction but clearly imprecise geometric update; and 0.0 indicates no geometric change, wrong-direction change, or vanished geom-etry. We intentionally omit 0.75 for VLCS because there is no stable intermediate state between strict GT matching and partial or imprecise synchroniza-tion that can be judged consistently. The core judge prompts are detailed in Figure 12. 

E Qualitative Analysis 

To provide an intuitive understanding of the per-formance gap and specific failure modes discussed in our main text, we present a systematic quali-tative evaluation across four distinct chart editing scenarios, spanning Figures 13 to 16. 

Case 1: Textual Manipulation Failure and Struc-tural Collapse. Figure 13 presents a representa-tive visual comparison of a multiple VLCE task. The visual evidence clearly illustrates the severe capability gap in dependency-aware reasoning. Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 completely fails to execute the coupled modifications. It suffers from severe TMF by generating hallucinated numerical labels, alongside a total collapse of structural integrity where the stacked geometric bars are severely trun-cated or entirely erased. In contrast, Nano Ba-nana Pro successfully comprehends the underlying data logic. It precisely updates the target texts and synchronously adjusts the internal proportional widths of the geometric bar segments. This compar-ison definitively validates our quantitative findings, demonstrating that frontier proprietary models pos-sess robust dependency-aware reasoning to achieve geometric synchronization, whereas open-source architectures remain severely bottlenecked by foun-dational perception and rendering. 

Case 2: Visuo-Logical Inconsistency and Global Layout Corruption. Figure 14 evaluates a single VLCE task requiring a numerical adjustment from 35 to 33 and its corresponding geometric downscal-ing. Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 successfully executes the literal text substitution but suffers from abso-lute VLI, where the coupled bar height is modified erroneously, moving in an inverted direction. Fur-thermore, the open-source candidate triggers severe global layout corruption: unedited data bars are ran-domly stretched or truncated, and the completely unrelated y-axis tick labels are hallucinated and al-tered. In sharp contrast, Nano Banana Pro demon-strates precise visual-quantitative synchronization, executing the exact geometric deformation for the targeted bar while maintaining full alignment with the ground-truth data. 

Case 3: A Residual Semantic-Isolation Failure. 

Figure 15 isolates a multiple text-only editing task where no geometric updates are required. While both models achieve high textual edit success by accurately substituting the target text blocks, this example shows a residual BC failure for Nano Ba-nana Pro: its generative boundary bleeds into an untargeted region and accidentally changes the fill color of the unedited “Psychology” bar segment. Conversely, Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 preserves the background in this particular case. We emphasize that this example is not intended to imply worse aggregate background fidelity for proprietary mod-els; indeed, Nano Banana Pro obtains the highest BFS in Table 2. Instead, it illustrates that once text rendering and VLCE synchronization improve, se-mantic isolation can remain a visible residual error mode. 

Case 4: Joint Reasoning Collapse under Highly Coupled Dependencies. Figure 16 evaluates a complex cascading instruction under an advanced chart editing scenario. In this instance, both ar-chitectures exhibit a total breakdown in quantita-tive geometric scaling despite achieving successful local text rendering. When calculating the cas-cading physical deformation dictated by the data modification, Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 expands the targeted data bar excessively upward, causing se-vere scale inflation. Simultaneously, Nano Banana Pro falls into an opposite failure mode, scaling the identical bar segment significantly below the ground-truth magnitude. This mutual failure vali-dates the high difficulty and non-saturation of our benchmark, demonstrating that executing precise, instruction-driven quantitative transformations un-der dense visual-data coupling remains an open challenge for future multimodal architectures. Phase 1: Instruction Proposer Prompt 

You are an expert in chart data augmentation. Please carefully analyze the provided Python code and the chart image (generated by running the provided code). Based on a logical "Key-Value pair", select ONE suitable target text ( 'old_value ') to edit, with the goal of generating an 'instruction '.[Task] 1. Identify logical "Key-Value" pairs in the chart. - Case A (Inter-element): The Key is in one element (e.g., "Q3 Revenue for Tesla"), and the Value is in another (e.g., "450"). - Case B (Implicit Key in a Single Block): If a text block contains a clear value but no explicit key, select the target text as the 'Value ' and infer/generate a logical 'Key ' for it yourself. 2. Select ONE Key-Value pair to edit. The 'Value ' is the target to be modified ( 'old_value '). *IMPORTANT: Prioritize highly semantic and diverse text (e.g., specific amounts, dates, person names, addresses, specific metrics) over trivial elements. The 'key ' must NOT be a generic term without specific semantic meaning like "Axis", but rather represent the actual meaning of the axis (e.g., "Sales Amount").* 3. Generate a clear 'instruction ' for editing this value ( 'old_value '). (The 'instruction ' MUST contain the 'key ', 'old_value ', and 'new_value '.) [Critical Constraints] 1. ONLY select text elements in the chart. Valid text element types in the chart include: 

`chart_title `, `subplot_title `, `axis_title `, `tick_label `, `legend_label `, `data_label `, `node_label `, `edge_label `.2. The 'new_value ' MUST maintain exactly the same language and style as the 'old_value ',as well as the logical relationship corresponding to the key. 3. Strict Alignment: The 'new_value ' MUST strictly maintain the exact same number of words as the 'old_value '.You must precisely match the number of words (one word replaced by one word, no more or no less). Furthermore, the 'new_value ' MUST have roughly the same CHARACTER COUNT as the 'old_value ' to prevent layout breaking. Punctuation marks must also be replaced or retained individually in correspondence. 4. Location Precision: The 'instruction ' MUST rely on the 'key ' and 'old_value ' as the primary semantic anchors for a downstream model to locate the target text. 5. Proposing edits that create logical contradictions with the rest of the chart is perfectly ACCEPTABLE (e.g., an instruction requires changing the percentage label value of a pie chart without altering the corresponding pie chart slice size). These contradictions will be identified and fixed by downstream Agents. [Output Format] Please output strictly in JSON format with the following fields. Return ONLY the raw JSON object. Do NOT wrap it in Markdown formatting (no ``` json ... ``` ) and do NOT add any conversational text: "category": The text element type containing the 'old_value ' (e.g., "legend_label", "data_label", "tick_label"). "old_value": The specific text in the chart to be modified. Ensure 'old_value ' is a hardcoded string or numeric literal exactly as it appears in the provided Python code. "key": A short description of what the 'old_value ' represents (e.g., "Date", "Company Name", "Total Amount", "Q3 Revenue for Tesla"). "new_value": The generated replacement text. "instruction": A natural language command for an image editing model. Use semantic context. Examples of good instructions: (1) "Change the issue date '1999 ' to '2005 '." (2) "Change the company 'Samsung Electronics ' to 'Hyundai Motors '." (3) "Change the 2024 profit '7.32M ' to '8.43M '." (4) "Replace the accountant name 'John Smith ' with 'Jack Brown '." [Example JSON Output] {"category": "data_label", "old_value": "450", "key": "Q3 Revenue for Tesla", "new_value": "480", "instruction": "Change the Q3 Revenue value for Tesla from '450 ' to '480 '." }[Python Source Code] {source_code} 

Figure 7: The prompt for the Instruction Proposer. It guides the model to identify semantic key-value pairs and propose localized textual editing instructions that will implicitly trigger downstream visuo-logical cascading updates. Phase 1: Instruction Evaluator Prompt 

You are an evaluator for synthetic chart image augmentation. Your task is to judge whether the proposed edit scheme can produce a high-quality edited chart image and a valid edit-instruction sample.This is NOT a fact-checking task against the original chart image. The "new_value" is allowed to differ from the original chart image, because the image will be edited later. [Proposed JSON] {proposed_json_str} [Pass Conditions] A proposal should PASS only if ALL of the following conditions are true: 1. "old_value" is a clear, localizable, and meaningful text target. 2. "category" is valid for charts and belongs to one of: chart_title, subplot_title, axis_title, tick_label, legend_label, data_label, node_label, edge_label. 3. "new_value" MUST have the exact same number of words and roughly the same character count as "old_value", matching its language and style. 4. "instruction" MUST contain the 'key ', 'old_value ', and 'new_value '.5. After replacement, the edited text looks natural in the chart. 6. The sample has substantial training value. [Fail Conditions & Taxonomy] A proposal should FAIL if ANY of the following conditions are met. Assign the corresponding "failure_type": - "target_not_found": The "old_value" is vague, meaningless, or cannot be reliably localized in the chart. - "category_mismatch": The "category" is missing, invalid, or not in the allowed chart text element types. - "format_mismatch": The "new_value" does not have the exact same number of words as the "old_value", significantly differs in character length, or breaks the original language/style, making it look unnatural. - "vague_instruction": The "instruction" fails to explicitly include the 'key ', 'old_value ', or 'new_value '.- "low_training_value": The target text is trivial (e.g., a simple page number or generic header) and lacks meaningful training value. - "other": Any other format or parsing issue. [IMPORTANT POLICY] 1. DO NOT fail a proposal due to "logical inconsistencies" (e.g., broken arithmetic, timeline conflicts, or chart-text mismatches). We INTENTIONALLY allow these contradictions to test the self-correction capabilities of downstream agents. 2. DO NOT fail a proposal simply because the original image does not support the "new_value". 3. DO NOT treat this as a fact-checking or error-correcting task for the original document. [OUTPUT FORMAT] Please output strictly in JSON format. Return ONLY the raw JSON object. Do NOT wrap it in Markdown formatting (no ``` json ... ``` ): {"status": "pass" or "fail" (strictly lowercase), "failure_type": "target_not_found", "category_mismatch", "format_mismatch", "vague_instruction", "low_training_value", "other", or "none" (MUST be "none" if status is "pass"), "feedback": "If fail, please explain the exact flaw or risk and how to improve it. If pass, briefly confirm the reason." }

Figure 8: The prompt for Instruction Evaluator. It serves as a quality gate to verify the format, target alignment, and training value of proposed instructions while intentionally preserving logical contradictions. Phase 2: Code Generator Prompt 

You are a senior Python code editing planner for chart dataset construction. [Goal] Edit the given Python plotting code so that the edit instruction is realized in code. Use minimal necessary edits, but include all causally related updates required to keep chart semantics consistent. [Task Metadata] - round: {current_round}/{max_rounds} - key: {key} - old_value: {old_value} - new_value: {new_value} - instruction: {instruction} [Chart Families] bar, box, errorbar, errorpoint, graph, multidiff, pie, radar, tree, PIP [Target Categories] chart_title, subplot_title, axis_title, tick_label, legend_label, data_label, node_label, edge_label [Hard Constraints] 1. First identify the PRIMARY target required by the instruction. 2. Then build a REQUIRED PROPAGATION SET: all code locations that must be updated to preserve semantic consistency. 3. Keep edits minimal, but do not leave causal inconsistencies unresolved. 4. Do not refactor unrelated code. 5. Preserve executable Python syntax. [Propagation Workflow] 1. Locate the primary target. 2. Find all same-entity/same-source references that must stay consistent. 3. Apply only required propagation edits. 4. Re-check value relationships and chart geometry consistency. [Cascade Detection Rules: Target Category] - chart_title/subplot_title: if shared title text or shared title variable is reused across subplots, update all same-source occurrences. - axis_title: if x/y or multi-panel plots share same title variable/text convention, propagate to all same-source axis titles. - tick_label: if x and y axes use symmetric or mirrored tick labels, or shared tick arrays/formatters, propagate across linked axes. - legend_label: when legend item text changes, also update in-plot text/annotations/labels that refer to the same entity. - data_label: update both displayed label text and underlying data values/arrays needed to realize the label change. - node_label/edge_label: keep graph labels consistent with node/edge data structures and any edge weight text. [Cascade Detection Rules: Chart Family] - bar: keep label text, bar value arrays, grouping order, and legend mapping aligned. - box: keep category labels aligned with grouped data and positions/order. - errorbar/errorpoint: keep central values, error ranges, and displayed labels consistent. - graph: keep edge/node labels consistent with graph data and weight annotations. - pie: when one slice data_label/percentage is changed, satisfy instruction and appropriately scale one or more other slices so totals remain coherent. - radar: keep category labels, value arrays, and polygon geometry consistent. - tree: keep hierarchical labels, proportions/areas, and parent-child totals consistent. - multidiff/PIP: keep main panel and linked inset/secondary panel values, labels, and linked annotations consistent. [Output JSON Schema] Return ONLY raw JSON with these fields: {"thought": "why this edit is chosen", "edited_code": "the full edited Python code as a JSON string" }[Critical Output Rules] 1. "edited_code" MUST be the complete final Python code after editing. 2. "edited_code" MUST be a valid JSON string with proper escaping for newlines and quotes. 3. Do NOT output markdown code fences. 4. Do NOT wrap code in triple quotes. [Source Code] {source_code} [Previous Failed Plan] {previous_plan_json} [Previous Validation Result] {previous_validation_json} [Feedback] {feedback_text} Return JSON only. No markdown. 

Figure 9: The prompt for Code Generator. It enforces visuo-logical propagation rules across diverse chart families to ensure that code modifications maintain absolute geometric and mathematical precision. Phase 2: Logic Validator Prompt 

You are a strict code-edit validator for chart dataset construction. [Goal] Evaluate whether the code edit is valid for the instruction and logically consistent. This is code-only validation. Do not require OCR/layout checks. [Task Metadata] - round: {current_round}/{max_rounds} - old_value: {old_value} - new_value: {new_value} - instruction: {instruction} [Planner Output] {edited_code} [Checks] 1. Instruction alignment: edit matches the requested semantic target. 2. Propagation-scope discipline: edits can span multiple locations, but only required propagation locations should be changed (no unrelated broad edits). 3. Old->new realization: replacement is actually reflected in code semantics, not only literal text. 4. Semantic propagation consistency for target categories (chart_title/subplot_title/axis_title/tick_label/legend_label/data_label/node_label/edge_label). 5. Numeric and structural consistency: - sum/total/percentage relationships remain coherent, - chart geometry-driving data is synchronized with updated labels, - linked panels (multidiff/PIP) remain mutually consistent. 6. Python safety: code appears syntactically valid and runnable. 7. Logic consistency: no obvious internal contradiction after all propagated edits. [Evidence Guidance] When failing, provide concrete evidence snippets such as: - before/after sum or percentage relationships, - mismatches between label text and value arrays, - missing propagation locations for shared axis titles, ticks, or legends. [Failure Types] - instruction_mismatch - target_not_modified - over_edit - syntax_risk - logic_inconsistency - other [Output JSON Schema] Return ONLY raw JSON: {"status": "pass" or "fail", "failure_type": "instruction_mismatch|target_not_modified|over_edit|syntax_risk|logic_inconsistency|other|none", "evidence": ["evidence A", "evidence B"], "checks": { "instruction_alignment": true or false, "single_location_edit": true or false, "old_to_new_realized": true or false, "python_syntax_likely_valid": true or false, "logic_consistency": true or false }, "suggested_fix": "specific suggestion for next round" }Interpretation note: - In the schema, `single_location_edit ` means propagation-scope discipline. - Set it to true when edits are limited to the required propagation set (even if multiple code locations are edited). [Source Code Before] {source_code} [Edited Code Candidate] {edited_code} 

Figure 10: The prompt for Logic Validator. It acts as an iterative verification mechanism to ensure that programmatic edits correctly propagate semantic constraints without introducing over-editing or syntax errors. OCR Extraction Prompt 

You are an OCR engine for chart/document images. Extract ALL visible text in the full image and provide each text with one normalized bbox. Return ONLY a valid JSON object with this schema: "items": [ "text": "<detected text>", "bbox": [xmin, ymin, xmax, ymax] ]Rules: - bbox is normalized to [0,1000]. - xmin < xmax, ymin < ymax. - No markdown, no explanation. 

Figure 11: The GPT-5.4-based prompt used for OCR extraction in OCR F 1 computation. The VLM-as-a-Judge Prompt 

You are an expert and impartial judge evaluating chart image editing tasks. You will receive 3 images: [Source, GroundTruth, ModelOutput]. Instruction: "{instruction}" Task: Evaluate the ModelOutput based on its visual fidelity to GroundTruth and adherence to the Instruction. You MUST evaluate three STRICTLY DECOUPLED dimensions: 1. Textual_Edit_Success (Score: 0.0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, or 1.0): - STRICTLY evaluate ONLY the target TEXT mentioned in the Instruction. - Use Source vs GroundTruth to infer the REQUIRED text edit, then check ModelOutput vs GroundTruth. - Consider BOTH the text content (OCR-level correctness) AND its spatial properties (geometric center, alignment, scale/size) compared to the GroundTruth. - Ignore any unrelated geometric or background changes. - Rubric: - 1.0: Perfect. All target text content is correct AND perfectly placed/sized to match the GroundTruth. - 0.8: Minor flaws. Text content is correct, but there are slight, minor deviations in position or size. - 0.6: Noticeable spatial errors or minor content omission. Text content is correct but noticeably misaligned/rescaled, OR (in multi-target edits) most targets are perfect but a minor one is missed. - 0.4: Major spatial errors or half content success. Text content is correct but placed in entirely wrong regions, OR only about half of the text targets are edited correctly. - 0.2: Severe failure. Barely any text was edited correctly, or the edited text is severely truncated/distorted making it almost illegible. - 0.0: Complete failure. No requested text edits were performed, or the text was completely erased/hallucinated. 2. Background_Fidelity (Score: 0.0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, or 1.0): - STRICTLY evaluate ONLY the UNTARGETED, background, and irrelevant parts of the chart, including rendering of non-target text. - Completely IGNORE the edited target text and its directly coupled geometric regions (e.g., the specific bar or pie slice being edited). - All other non-target structures should align with the GroundTruth (e.g., axes, gridlines, legends, non-target marks). - Rubric: - 1.0: Perfect fidelity; untargeted regions match the GroundTruth exactly. - 0.75: Minor unnoticeable artifacts (e.g., anti-aliasing differences) or slight color shifts in untargeted areas. - 0.5: Localized obvious issues, but the overall chart structure remains clearly recognizable. - 0.25: Structural collapse or large-area errors in untargeted regions. - 0.0: Unrecognizable chart layout or complete hallucination. 3. Visuo_Logical_Consistency (Score: 0.0, 0.25, 0.5, or 1.0): (Provided if applicable) - STRICTLY evaluate ONLY the NON-TEXT geometric elements representing the data values. - Target Geometry: This includes bar/box height or length, line series position/shape, pie slice angle/area, error-bar length, radar point positions and filled area shape, scatter point positions. - This dimension measures the 'Data-to-Graphic ' mapping. Do NOT score the text characters here (Dimension 1 already covers text content and its spatial properties). - **Delta Audit**: Compare Source vs GroundTruth to identify the required geometric change (e.g., bar height increase). Then check if ModelOutput performed this change. - **STRICT NO-CHANGE PENALTY**: Look extremely closely at the pixels. If the geometric shape/size/position in ModelOutput is EXACTLY THE SAME as the Source Image (i.e., the model only updated the text but failed to adjust the graphics), you MUST score 0.0. A score of 0.0 is mandatory if the geometry is identical to the Source, even if the text was correctly edited. - Rubric: - 1.0: PERFECT. All target geometries changed in the correct direction AND strictly match the GroundTruth magnitude/shape. - 0.5: PARTIAL. In multi-target edits, some targets are perfectly correct while others fail. (If single-target, use this score if it is a partial shape match). - 0.25: IMPRECISE. The target(s) changed in the correct direction compared to Source, but clearly FAIL to match the exact GroundTruth magnitude/shape. - 0.0: FAILURE. No geometric change from Source (identical pixels), changed in wrong direction, or geometry vanished. Return STRICTLY a JSON object with this schema (Choose scores ONLY from the allowed sets): {"Textual_Edit_Success": {"score": <0.0 or 0.2 or 0.4 or 0.6 or 0.8 or 1.0>, "reasoning": "<Brief text>"}, "Background_Fidelity": {"score": <0.0 or 0.25 or 0.5 or 0.75 or 1.0>, "reasoning": "<Brief text>"}, "Visuo_Logical_Consistency": {"score": <0.0 or 0.25 or 0.5 or 1.0>, "reasoning": "<Brief text>"}, "Overall_Assessment": "<1 sentence summary>" }

Figure 12: The prompt for VLM Judge. It defines the holistic evaluation criteria across three decoupled dimensions: textual precision, background fidelity, and visuo-logical consistency, ensuring a granular and objective assessment of generative chart editing. Figure 13: Case 1: Qualitative comparison of generative chart editing given a complex multi-value instruction. Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 experiences severe text rendering and structural collapse, whereas Nano Banana Pro accurately synchronizes the internal geometric segment widths with the target numerical modifications. Figure 14: Case 2: Qualitative assessment under a single VLCE task. While Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 modifies the target literal string, it triggers severe VLI and global layout corruption. Nano Banana Pro achieves perfect text-graphics synchronization matching the ground truth. 

Figure 15: Case 3: Qualitative example of a remaining semantic-isolation failure. Both models alter the target texts correctly, while Nano Banana Pro accidentally shifts the color of an unedited bar segment in this specific example. This case illustrates a residual failure mode rather than an aggregate weakness of proprietary models. Figure 16: Case 4: Qualitative analysis under a complex cascading instruction. Both open-source and proprietary models execute text modifications successfully but suffer from complete geometric reasoning collapse, highlighting the non-saturated challenge of ChartSync.