Title: AlbedoEdit: Unified Instance-Level Video Editing with Albedo Guidance

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.01362v1

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 02:09:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# AlbedoEdit: Unified Instance-Level Video Editing with Albedo Guidance 

# Xilong Zhou 1 Bao-Huy Nguyen 1 Zheng Zeng 2,3 Jacob Munkberg 3 Jon Hasselgren 3

# Thomas Leimk¨ uhler 1 Nima Kalantari 4 Miloˇ s Haˇ san 3 Christian Theobalt 11Max Planck Institute for Informatics 2University of California Santa Barbara 

> 3

# NVIDIA Research 4Texas A &M University 

# Abstract 

Video generative models have achieved remarkable progress in synthesizing photorealistic video sequences. However, enabling broader and more creative downstream applications requires fine-grained instance-level video edit-ing, including object insertion, object removal, and texture editing, which has emerged as a prominent yet challeng-ing problem. Existing approaches either propose unified generative frameworks with only coarse semantic control, or design task-specific frameworks for individual editing tasks, limiting their flexibility and applicability across di-verse real-world scenarios. To address these limitations, we propose AlbedoEdit , a unified generative video editing framework that jointly supports object insertion, object re-moval, and texture editing. Our key insight is that the intrin-sic albedo map, which is invariant to lighting and contains no specularity, shadowing and inter-reflection effects, pro-vides an effective and user-friendly mechanism for specify-ing fine-grained appearance edits. Built upon video foun-dation models, AlbedoEdit is fine-tuned to translate source RGB videos into edited RGB videos, conditioned on a user-edited first-frame albedo. Trained on a new paired syn-thetic dataset covering all three editing tasks, AlbedoEdit 

implicitly learns to harmonize edited contents and simulate complex real-world visual effects triggered by editing op-erations, including specular highlights, soft shadows, and mirror reflections. AlbedoEdit demonstrates superior per-formance over state-of-the-art video editing approaches, both qualitatively and quantitatively. Project webpage is 

https://vcai.mpi- inf.mpg.de/projects/ AlbedoEdit .

# 1. Introduction 

Recent advances in video generative models [5, 14, 18, 23, 42, 46] have enabled the synthesis of physically plausible video sequences with high-quality appearance and anima-tion. Despite these advances, extending video generative models to support more flexible and creative downstream applications requires fine-grained object-level video edit-ing. In this paper, we consider three core editing tasks: video object insertion (VOI), video object removal (VOR), and video texture editing (VTE). These tasks aim to ma-nipulate individual objects or regions in a physically accu-rate manner while preserving the appearance of unedited content (Fig. 1). They are inherently challenging, as they require a thorough understanding of scene illumination, ac-curate modeling of physical interactions between elements over time, and faithful simulation of complex visual effects introduced by the edits. Existing approaches attempt to address these challenges by post-training powerful video generative models. One line of work [6, 20, 45, 57] trains unified generative frame-works for multi-modal video editing tasks conditioned on coarse semantic signals. Although these methods can syn-thesize visually pleasing results, their reliance on coarse se-mantics prevents them from supporting precise user guid-ance, such as exact object placement and fine-grained tex-ture manipulation. Another line of work introduces fine-grained object-level control but tackles each editing task in-dependently, such as mask-guided insertion [11, 21], mask-guided removal [10, 33, 34], 3D-aware manipulation [13, 25, 43, 50], and intrinsic material editing [9, 27, 31, 51]. Despite achieving higher quality than the unified models, these task-specific frameworks lack flexibility. Moreover, in the VOI task, several of the existing methods tend to pre-serve the appearance of inserted objects in their original en-vironments, leading to poor harmonization with the source video. To address these limitations, we propose AlbedoEdit , a unified video editing framework that jointly supports in-sertion, removal, and texture editing tasks, while simu-lating physically plausible complex light transport effects in the edited videos. Our key insight is that the albedo map, as an illumination-invariant intrinsic property, pro-vides a robust conditioning signal for generative video mod-els and offers a simpler avenue for downstream editing op-     

> arXiv:2606.01362v1 [cs.GR] 31 May 2026 Video object insertion (ducks) Video object insertion (duck & boat) Video object removal (swan) Video harmonization (ducks) Figure 1. AlbedoEdit is a unified generative video editing framework supporting object insertion, object removal, and texture editing. We leverage the intrinsic albedo map as an effective and user-friendly mechanism for specifying fine-grained appearance edits. We show object insertion, object removal, and an additional insertion example demonstrating lighting harmonization capabilities of the model. The source and target albedo frames are shown above each video.

erations, compared to direct RGB-space manipulation. In-spired by diffusion-based inverse and forward rendering ap-proaches [16, 27, 51], we design AlbedoEdit as an end-to-end generative framework that translates source videos into edited target videos, conditioned on explicitly edited albedo. Specifically, AlbedoEdit is built upon the DiT-based diffusion backbone [35], taking as input the concate-nated latents of the source video, the original albedo and the edited albedo, and producing the corresponding edited RGB video through an iterative denoising process. To train AlbedoEdit , we design and render a large-scale high-fidelity synthetic dataset comprising paired RGB and albedo videos across all three object-level editing tasks, and leverage a Large Vision-Language Model (VLM) [4] to generate descriptive text prompts for each training sam-ple. During inference, users can simply apply an off-the-shelf inverse rendering model [27, 51] to extract the first-frame albedo from the source video, apply object-level ed-its directly to the albedo image, and pass the original and edited albedo frame to AlbedoEdit . Our model implic-itly understands the environmental illumination and com-plex light transport interactions between objects from the source video, plausibly simulating complex visual effects including specular highlights, soft shadows, mirror reflec-tions, and overall harmonization. Despite being trained ex-clusively on synthetic data, AlbedoEdit generalizes well to diverse real-world scenarios, producing high-fidelity edit-ing results that outperform existing state-of-the-art meth-ods. Our contributions are summarized as follows: • We introduce AlbedoEdit , a unified generative editing framework that jointly supports multiple object-level ap-pearance editing tasks: video object insertion (VOI), video object removal (VOR), and video texture editing (VTE). • We demonstrate that the albedo map serves as a powerful tool for object-level video editing, enabling simpler edit-ing operations and illumination-aware simulation of com-plex real-world visual effects, including specular high-lights, soft shadows, and mirror reflections. • We build a large-scale, high-quality dataset for three video editing tasks, enabling effective training of an end-to-end editing framework. • We demonstrate that the resulting AlbedoEdit model produces high-fidelity video editing results, and outper-forms state-of-the-art video editing methods for compa-rable tasks both qualitatively and quantitatively. We will release our models and dataset to the commu-nity. 

# 2. Related Work 

Built upon successful video generative models [5, 18, 23, 42, 47], controllable video generation and editing have be-come increasingly critical tasks due to their compatibil-ity with multimodal downstream applications such as con-tent creation, gaming, autonomous driving, and robotics. Controllable video generation covers broad and diverse di-rections, including personalization [1, 12], camera con-trol [15, 49], style transfer [13, 20], motion control [25, 39], and object manipulation [13]. In this work, we focus on instance-level video editing, and related work in this field can be classified into two categories: unified instance-level editing and task-specific editing. 

2.1. Universal Video Editing 

The first line of work attempts to jointly address multimodal instance-level editing within a unified framework. A pop-ular paradigm adopted by most existing approaches is to extend pretrained diffusion models with auxiliary modality guidance [52]. Specifically, VACE [20] proposes to inte-grate various editing tasks into a Video Condition Unit, in-corporated into DiT-based video models to build a universal editing framework. UniVideo [45] employs a Multimodal Large Language Model for visual understanding alongside a Multimodal DiT for visual generation, forming a dual-stream design. UNIC [48] integrates all input tokens into a single consecutive token sequence. AnyV2V [24] leverages an off-the-shelf image editing model to edit the first frame, and subsequently applies an image-to-video (I2V) model to generate the edited video. Although these unified gener-ative frameworks are capable of synthesizing high-fidelity results, they are typically guided by coarse semantic con-ditions and lack precise, fine-grained control over instance placement and texture. Moreover, these frameworks strug-gle to produce photorealistic appearances of edited compo-nents, as they do not explicitly disentangle environmental illumination from scene content. 

2.2. Task-specific Video Editing 

Object Insertion is a prominent yet challenging video edit-ing task. Producing plausible edited results requires the framework to not only understand the physical light trans-port of the source video and image of reference object, but also support user-friendly control, simulating physically ac-curate visual effects and object harmonization. Existing methods tackle this task using different modalities as con-trol signals. Anything in Any Scene [3] inserts and manip-ulates objects through an object mesh with lighting estima-tion and shadow generation modules. Some existing meth-ods [38, 50, 55] rely on an object mask or instance mask to specify the placement of the inserted object. To incor-porate 3D and 4D priors, InsertAnywhere [21] leverages a 4D-aware mask generation process, while PISCO [11] uti-lizes user-specified keyframe depth maps of the video and reference object image. Although these methods produce convincing edited results, the inserted objects often fail to harmonize correctly with the source video, exhibiting a syn-thetic appearance. DiffusionHarmonizer [54], a concurrent work, attempts to address this issue by training diffusion models to refine imperfect composites and improve harmo-nization. 

Object Removal aims to erase object instances from a video while also eliminating the secondary effects intro-duced by the removed object, such as shadow casting, lighting, and reflections. Existing video inpainting meth-ods [6, 26, 56, 57] can remove certain objects in the source video, but they struggle to eliminate the side effects intro-duced by the objects. To address this issue, ROSE [33] and EffectErase [10] were proposed to automatically learn af-fected regions outside the mask input and enable side ef-fects removal. These two approaches are effective, but they rely on a mask sequence of the entire video. A concurrent work, Void [34], is trained to understand both appearance and physical interaction in the scene, enabling it to delete secondary motion and other side effects introduced by the object. 

Texture Editing is a long-standing problem that has been extended from the image domain to video. Existing meth-ods [27, 51] train separate generative priors for intrinsic decomposition and forward rendering. By editing the ex-tracted intrinsic channels, these approaches can re-render edited scenes under novel illumination conditions. While they support precise material editing, they struggle to fully preserve the input video quality due to ambiguities in il-lumination estimation. IntrinsicEdit [31] achieves image-level intrinsic editing via DDIM inversion, but this approach is time-consuming and not easily extensible to video. The most recent work V-RGBX [9] proposes an end-to-end intrinsic-aware video editing framework supporting fine-grained editing of arbitrary intrinsic channels, but works in two stages (inverse and forward), which struggles to pre-serve the exact input appearance in unedited areas. Although task-specific methods produce visually pleas-ing editing results, their non-unified designs fundamentally limit their flexibility and applicability across diverse real-world scenarios. In contrast, AlbedoEdit is designed as a unified framework that jointly addresses all three instance-level editing tasks, while achieving superior performance over individual task-specific methods. 

# 3. Preliminaries 

Diffusion models [17, 40] have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in image and video generation tasks [8, 23, 37, 42]. The core idea is to approximate a target data dis-tribution through a forward diffusion process and a learned iterative denoising process. In the forward diffusion pro-cess, a clean sample x0 ∼ q(x) is progressively corrupted by adding Gaussian noise ϵ ∼ N (0 , I), yielding a noisy sample xt = αtx0 + σtϵ, where αt and σt are time-dependent coefficients determined by noise schedulers. A denoiser fθ is then trained to predict the added noise con-ditioned on the time step t, conditional signal c, and the noisy sample xt. The training objective is then formulated as ∥fθ (xt, t, c ) − ϵ∥2. Flow matching [29] offers an alter-native formulation in which the forward process is defined as a linear interpolation between the clean data and noise: 

xt = (1 − t)x0 + tϵ . Instead of predicting noise, in the flow matching paradigm fθ is trained to predict the target veloc-ity field ∥fθ (xt, t, c ) − v∥2, where ”velocity” is formulated as v = ϵ − x0. Flow matching is widely used in recent video generation models, and we adopt this paradigm for our video editing framework. To improve computational efficiency, most video gener-ative models operate in a lower-dimensional latent space, similar to latent diffusion [37]. Specifically, a pretrained Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [22, 41] E maps an RGB video V ∈ RF ×H×W ×3, consisting of F frames at spa-tial reolution H × W , into lower dimensional latent repre-sentation z ∈ Rf ×h×w×C , where f , h, w denotes down-scaled temporal and spatial dimension, and C denotes fea-ture channel. Here, fθ operates in latent space, and the de-noised latent is decoded into video via the VAE decoder 

D. In addition, Diffusion Transformer (DiT) [35] is one popular video generative framework, where latent space is Frozen          

> ...
> DiT video model
> Optimizable
> Input video VsEdited video VtExtracted albedo a₀Edited albedo a₁Noisy target latent ztVtText prompt

zVs ztVt zVt

za₀ za₁"This scene features a mix of objects—a brick sphere, a terracotta horse vessel, a blue sports car, and metallic spheres —resting on a woven floor." Figure 2. Method overview. Given an input RGB video Vs, our video editing framework synthesizes an edited RGB video Vt, conditioned on the input video, a text prompt, and two intrinsic albedo images, the extracted albedo a0 from the first video frame, and the edited albedo, 

a1. The input video and albedo images are all VAE-encoded to latent space and concatenated along the frame dimension together with the noisy target latent. The text prompt (describing the edited video) is provided through cross-attention, following Wan2.1 [42]. The finetuned DiT denoises the latent. Finally, the denoised latent is decoded back to RGB space to produce the edited video. 

pachified and flattened into a sequence of tokens and fed into transformer layers. We opt to build AlbedoEdit on the Wan 2.1 [42] open-source DiT-based video diffusion model, due to its high-fidelity and temporally consistent video out-put, as well as ease of use and finetuning. 

# 4. Method 

In this section, we present our architecture design (Sec. 4.1), describe how we create a synthetic dataset suitable for video editing (Sec. 4.2), and discuss the inference (Sec. 4.3) and training processes (Sec. 4.4), respectively. 

4.1. Architecture 

Given an input RGB video Vs ∈ RF ×H×W ×3, the goal of the object-level video editing framework is to synthesize an edited RGB video Vt ∈ RF ×H×W ×3, conditioned on dif-ferent modalities, such as a text prompt or reference image describing edited objects, or mask indicating the location of the removed or inserted object. In AlbedoEdit , we opt to operate on the intrinsic albedo image a ∈ R1×H×W ×3

of the first video frame, because of its flexibility for di-verse editing tasks (VOI, VOR, and VTE), its invariance to illumination, and its lack of global effects (shadows, re-flections). For example, in the VTE task, editing textures in the albedo space allows users to directly replace source textures with target textures without interference from illu-mination effects. In the VOI task, inserting the delit object albedo facilitates better harmonization and avoids illumina-tion ambiguities introduced by reference images. We em-pirically find that including albedo before and after editing helps highlight the edited content, producing more robust results than providing only the edited albedo. The conditions in AlbedoEdit are concatenated as frames to a DiT model. Specifically, the input video Vs,along with the first frame albedo before and after edit-ing operations a0 and a1, are fed into the pretrained VAE encoder E independently, producing the corresponding la-tents, za0 , za1 , and zVs . These latents, together with the time-dependent noisy target latent zVt 

> t

, are concatenated along the temporal dimension to form the input to the DiT model. Similar frame-wise concatenation approaches have been used by UniRelight [16] and MaterialPicker [32], for relighting and material generation tasks, respectively. We follow the training objective in the flow matching paradigm, and our finetuning objective function is formulated as fol-lows: 

L = fθ (zVt 

> t

, zVs , za0 , za1 , t, c ) − v 22

, (1) where c represents descriptive text prompts generated by a Vision-Language Model (VLM) [4], and v denotes ground truth velocity parameterized as ϵ − zVt . Our architecture overview is visualized in Fig. 2. 

4.2. Dataset 

Dataset Structure We construct a synthetic dataset con-sisting of paired RGB and albedo videos before and af-ter editing operations. Specifically, we organize the data into three groups: ( Vsrc , Asrc ) denoting the source RGB and albedo videos without any editing; ( Vobj , Aobj ) de-noting RGB and albedo videos with a set of inserted ob-jects; ( Vtex , Atex ) representing RGB and albedo videos with edited object textures and base colors. Full albedo videos are maintained to allow for clipping and reversal augmentations during training. Training on the source video in combination with the second or the third group enables the system to tackle the corresponding editing tasks. For VOI, the model is trained on the first and second groups (Vsrc , Asrc , Vobj , Aobj ), where Vs = Vsrc , Vt = Vobj ,

a0 = Asrc [0] , and a1 = Aobj [0] , following the objective function Eq. 1 described in Sec. 4.1. VOR is essentially the reverse process of VOI, where Vs, Vt, a0, and a1 are set as Vobj , Vsrc , Aobj [0] , and Asrc [0] respectively. Similarly, the model designed for the VTE is trained on the first and third groups ( Vsrc , Asrc , Vtex , Atex ). In practice, to tackle all these editing tasks jointly, AlbedoEdit is trained on the Object insertion (VOI / VOR) Texture editing (VTE)   

> Vsrc
> Vsrc
> Asrc
> Asrc
> Vobj obj AVtex Atex

Figure 3. Editing pairs from our training dataset. The top section shows object insertion (and inversely removal) examples and the bottom section illustrates texture editing. Edits are clearly marked in the albedo images except for the last example where the entire ground plane is edited. 

combinations of all these data within a unified framework. Please refer to Fig. 3 for a selection of editing pairs from our dataset. 

Scene Construction We follow a similar scene construc-tion strategy as DiffusionRenderer [27] and UniRelight [16] to build diverse synthetic scenes. In each scene, we set up an infinite planar surface with a randomly selected physically-based rendering (PBR) material. On top of the planar sur-face, we place multiple objects from two sources: 2 ∼ 4

3D assets curated from Objaverse [7] and 2 ∼ 4 built-in primitives from the rendering engine. To select high-qualty 3D assets from Objaverse, we first manually label 10K ob-jects: assigning a quality score of 1 to approximately 1K high-quality objects with clean geometry and visually ap-pealing appearance, and a quality score of 0 to the remain-ing 9K low-quality objects. Then we train a lightweight single-layer classifier on the labelled dataset which maps the CLIP embedding [36] of these rendered objects to a scalar quality score. The well-trained classifier, combined with an empirically determined threshold value of 0.8, is used to filter and select 36K high-quality 3D assets from Objaverse and Objaverse++ [28]. In addition to Objaverse objects, we select 2 ∼ 4 geometric primitives (cube, sphere, cylinder, monkey, cone, torus, icosphere) and assign each with a randomly selected PBR material. To better simulate a real-world scenario, our object layout consists of ”hero” 

mode, where a primary object is placed at the center of the Input video Vs       

> Extracted albedo a₀Object removal a₁Object insertion a₁Texture edits a₁

Figure 4. Our method takes a source video, extracts an albedo image, lets the user apply edits to the albedo image and generates new videos following the edits. 

scene surrounded by smaller secondary objects, and ”non-hero” mode, in which all objects of similar scale are dis-tributed uniformly across the plane. In both modes, object placement is optimized using bounding box constraints to prevent inter-object intersections. We further introduce di-verse smooth camera trajectories and object motions (such as static, rotation, circular translation, etc.) to simulate real-world dynamics. We also apply object scale and rotation augmentations to increase scene diversity. 

4.3. Inference Pipeline 

The inference pipeline is visualized in Fig. 4. Given an in-put video and an image of the reference object, our goal is to insert the reference object in the video at a specified position, remove existing contents in the video, or edit the texture of specified objects in the video. We first employ the inverse rendering module of an off-the-shelf model, Diffu-sionRenderer [27], to extract the albedo of the first frame of the video (and optionally the albedo of the inserted object, unless it is a 3D asset whose albedo is simply rendered). Next, we perform task-specific editing operations on the first-frame albedo using a standard image editing tool such as Photoshop [2]. Specifically, for VOI, the reference ob-ject albedo is composited into the scene albedo using alpha blending. For VOR, the target region is removed and filled using built-in image inpainting techniques. Finally, for VTE, the texture of the selected object is replaced with a tar-get texture. The edited albedo image, together with the in-put video and the original albedo, is fed into our framework to produce a clean edited video via multiple denoising steps. 

4.4. Training 

AlbedoEdit is built upon Wan2.1-T2V-14B [42], and we adopt the default training settings of the model. We fine-tune the full model on 8 H200 GPUs with a batch size of one per GPU and gradient accumulation of 16, resulting in an effective batch size of 128. The model is trained at a resolution of 832 × 480 pixels with 33 frames per clip, using the AdamW optimizer [30] with a learning rate of 

10 −5. We train the model for 30K iterations, equivalent to approximately 2k optimization iterations, which takes ap-proximately eight days. We also conduct experiments on longer video sequences, training a 53-frame model on the EffE 

Remove the Ducks Remove the Leaf 

Remove the Plant VACE UniV VP Source ROSE Ours GT EffE           

> VACE UniV VP Source VACE UniV VP Source ROSE Ours GT EffE
> ROSE Ours GT EffE Figure 5. Demonstration of VOR tasks on a benchmark dataset with ground-truth videos. We demonstrate visual results on three object removal examples and compare AlbedoEdit against three universal video editing frameworks (VACE [20], VP [6], and UniV [45]) as well as two methods specifically designed for VOR (EffE [10] and ROSE [33]). As shown in the figure, AlbedoEdit
> achieves the best visual quality in removing objects and their as-sociated side effects under fine-grained control.

same dataset. Note that our architecture uses additional input conditioning (input video and two albedo images) through frame concatenation, so for a video with N latent frames, our input latent consists of 2 ×N+2 latent frames, which roughly doubles the memory and compute require-ments compared to the Wan2.1-T2V-14B baseline (which is only conditioned on text). 

# 5. Results 

In this section, we evaluate editing results from our frame-work, both qualitatively and quantitatively. We first intro-duce our evaluation protocol in Sec. 5.1, including baseline methods, benchmark datasets, and evaluation metrics. Then we demonstrate comparisons with other baseline methods (Sec. 5.2 and Sec. 5.3) in three editing tasks. Please refer to our supplementary material for editing examples on videos and additional results. 

5.1. Evaluation Protocol 

Baselines We compare AlbedoEdit against previous uni-fied frameworks designed for multiple video editing tasks, as well as task-specific methods for VOI, VOR, and VTE. For unified video editing frameworks, we com-pare against VACE [20], UniVideo (UniV) [45], and Source    

> V-RGBX Ours GT
> Figure 6. Demonstration of VTE on a synthetic dataset. Our method is compared against V-RGBX [9] conditioned on the edited first frame of albedo in the video. All edited albedo re-gions are highlighted in the figure, including the ground indicated by the red arrow in the left example and the objects marked with red circles. As demonstrated, compared to V-RGBX, our method preserves the visual quality of the source video while restricting changes only to the intended edited regions, yielding coherent and physically plausible results. V-RGBX, as a two-stage inverse-forward render method, leads to slight changes in all image areas.

VideoPainter (VP) [6]. For task-specific baselines, we com-pare against ROSE [33] and EffectErase (EffE) [10] for VOR, PISCO [11] for VOI, and V-RGBX [9] for VTE. All methods are evaluated using the official code released by the authors. To ensure a fair comparison, all experiments are conducted at a similar resolution to our method. For baseline methods that require a text prompt as input, we utilize the same descriptive text prompt as our method. We test PISCO conditioned on the first frame only, consistent with our method. 

Evaluation Dataset To conduct an extensive evaluation, we demonstrate both quantitative and qualitative results on two groups of datasets: 1) datasets with ground truth (GT) or pseudo-GT, and 2) datasets without GT. For datasets with GT, we curate 9 scenes from the ROSE benchmark [33] and 7 scenes from VOR-Eval [10], both of which contain syn-thetic and real video pairs captured before and after object removal. We exclude videos exhibiting blurriness, repeti-tive content, defocus, strong motion caused by edited ob-jects, light source editing tasks, or objects with ambiguous identity or overly complex structure. We evaluate both the VOR and VOI tasks on the re-sulting dataset, given that these two processes are inverses of one another. However, in practice, inserted objects should not share the same lighting environment as the background video. To better evaluate robustness and simulate real-world applications, we perform a ”relit VOI”, VACE UniV PISCO Ours GT Source Object Figure 7. Demonstration of VOI tasks on the benchmark dataset with GT videos. Our method is compared against three universal video editing frameworks (VACE [20], VP [6], UniV [45]) and one VOI task (PISCO [11]). We show the insertion of the original objects as well as one relit object (VOI-Relit) into the source video. Existing unified frameworks lack precise control over the inserted objects, such as position and scale (indicated by the dashed square), whereas both PISCO and AlbedoEdit can produce fine-grained control of inserted objects. However, PISCO struggles to achieve physically plausible harmonization for the relit objects and misses the mirror reflection on the lake (indicated by the green arrow). Overall, AlbedoEdit produces high-quality, physically plausible edits while maintaining precise control over object insertion. 

where the same object is inserted after being relit using DiffusionRenderer [27] under different illumination. For VTE evaluation, we render 10 synthetic scenes following our dataset reconstruction pipeline with albedo edits. In addition to these ground-truth datasets, we qualitatively evaluate on in-the-wild captured data. We curate 24 samples from VOR-Wild [10] and several videos captured by ourselves. We evaluate VOR on the VOR-Wild data by removing objects present in the original videos, and further assess VOI and VTE by inserting external objects, which do not exist in the original video, and performing texture editing on these in-the-wild videos. 

Evaluation Metrics We evaluate edited video qual-ity using standard image metrics: Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) [44], and Learned Perceptual Image Patch Simi-larity (LPIPS) [53], computed on benchmark datasets with ground truth. For VOR and VTE, metrics are computed over full edited sequences; for VOI, evaluation is performed solely on the first frame, since our method takes only the first-frame albedo as input and provides no motion guid-ance. For evaluation across different methods, we crop and resize the GT videos to match the training resolution of each method, following its corresponding video process-ing pipeline. In addition to GT-based metrics, we em-ploy VBench [19] to assess comprehensive video quality for VOR and VOI evaluation on the ROSE and VOR-Eval datasets. 

5.2. Quantitative Results 

We demonstrate numerical results on the evaluation datasets with GT in Tab. 1 and visual results for three different tasks in Fig. 5, Fig. 7, and Fig. 6, respectively. As shown in Tab. 1, AlbedoEdit ranks among the top two across differ-ent editing tasks, achieving results quantitatively compara-ble to methods tailored for a specific task and numerically superior to most universal editing methods. Note that al-though VACE achieves a higher VBench score than ours on the VOR task, it typically only generates plausible videos under coarse control and lacks fine-grained control. For ex-ample, in Fig. 5, VACE does not correctly remove the ob-jects (leaf, plant, and ducks), which can still yield a high VBench score yet a low score on GT-based metrics. We highlight that in the first VOR example, AlbedoEdit is the only method that correctly removes the small leaf piece, ow-ing to the strong constraints of the albedo map. For VOI, PISCO performs best on GT-based metrics since it is tailored for the insertion task, and the standard VOI task involves inserting objects that originally existed in the video. The appearance of the inserted object in the standard VOI task is already harmonized with the background, and PISCO only focuses on capturing correct side effects such as shadows and reflections. In compar-ison, AlbedoEdit learns to understand the background environment, relight the inserted objects, and reproduce the VOR VTE Ours PISCO 

VOI Input Input Ours Ours Figure 8. Demonstration of free-form edits on in-the-wild videos. From left to right, we demonstrate VOI, VOR, and VTE results, respectively. Input source videos in the VTE task are highlighted with an orange border. For VOI (left), we insert external objects and compare our method qualitatively against PISCO [11]. AlbedoEdit achieves physically plausible harmonization with the scene, and correctly guesses which objects should have metallic appearance, whereas PISCO preserves the original appearance of the inserted objects and struggles to relight the object under the source video environment. For VOR (middle), AlbedoEdit effectively removes objects along with their complex side effects, even for objects with strong motion (e.g., rotating dice and birds interacting with water). For VTE (right), by replacing the texture of real-world objects with synthetic albedo maps, AlbedoEdit resynthesizes objects with photorealistic appearance and plausibly guesses material parameters unspecified in the albedo, such as a tea box made of glossy marble or leather. 

side effects they introduce. In addition to standard VOI, we also evaluate VOI-Relit , as discussed in Sec. 5.1, where the framework is conditioned on the reference image of the same relit object under novel illuminations. As shown in the table, in the VOI-Relit experiment, we achieve better PSNR and VBench scores and comparable SSIM to PISCO, while obtaining worse LPIPS. We conclude that PISCO is good at capturing high-frequency details of the object, to which LPIPS is sensitive, but fails to perform correct har-monization and color tone adjustment, resulting in worse PSNR than ours. As demonstrated in Fig. 7, universal methods can insert objects into videos, but they typically lack control over object position and size. While PISCO achieves visually plausible results for the original VOI task, it produces incorrect harmonization when inserting relit objects (the chairs and ducks). In comparison, AlbedoEdit 

not only achieves precise position control, but also supports better harmonization and relighting than other approaches. For the VTE task, we compare against V-RGBX [9] us-ing an edited first-frame albedo map. As demonstrated both qualitatively and quantitatively in Tab. 1 and Fig. 6, al-though V-RGBX can achieve decent albedo editing, it strug-gles to preserve the appearance of the source video. In com-parison, AlbedoEdit preserves the appearance and illumi-nation of the source video while also maintaining correct albedo editing introduced by the albedo maps. 

5.3. Qualitative Results 

In addition to quantitative evaluations on datasets with GT, we perform qualitative evaluations on an in-the-wild dataset and conduct free-form edits (without ground truth) for the three tasks, as demonstrated in Fig. 8. Specifically, we show in-the-wild VOI, inserting external objects that do not ex-ist in the source video, VOR, removing challenging moving 

objects in real videos, and VTE, replacing real object tex-tures with different synthetic albedo maps. We also qual-Table 1. Quantitative comparison of our method against baselines across three tasks (VOR, VOI, and VTE). We utilize three standard GT-based metrics (PSNR, LPIPS, and SSIM), and the weighted average score (Avg) of VBench for video quality evaluation with-out GT. In addition to VOI, we also include numerical evaluation on the VOI-Relit task (where the object is relit before insertion). 

Task Method GT-based Metrics VBench PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ Avg ↑

VOR 

VACE 22.37 .866 .246 .662 UniV 21.00 .685 .368 .645 VP 21.05 .839 .311 .655 EffE 27.84 .899 .256 .652 ROSE 28.17 .919 .244 .648 

Ours 27.64 .914 .220 .656 

VOI 

VACE 23.15 .858 .248 .658 UniV 17.99 .561 .430 .660 VP 21.17 .848 .313 .656 PISCO 27.10 .912 .205 .655 

Ours 25.22 .895 .233 .661 

VOI-Relit 

VACE 22.44 .853 .250 .664 UniV 17.58 .557 .434 .662 PISCO 24.38 .891 .219 .660 

Ours 24.79 .891 .236 .672 

VTE V-RGBX 19.46 .807 .378 –

Ours 28.04 .903 .217 –itatively compare AlbedoEdit against PISCO for the in-the-wild VOI task in Fig. 8. As shown, PISCO struggles with external object insertion, producing poor harmoniza-tion with synthetic appearance, such as the white swan and yellow ducks inserted into a reddish sunset scene. In com-parison, AlbedoEdit demonstrates physically plausible re-lighting and harmonization and can even capture physically plausible specular reflection interactions between inserted objects and original objects in the source video, such as the reflection of fruits on the surface of the tea cup in the top example and the reflection of the die on the surface of the inserted can or trophy in the middle example of the VOI task. In addition, our VOR and VTE results are also physi-cally convincing, e.g., replacing the texture of a tea cup with glossy marble in the bottom VTE example. We strongly recommend that readers consult the supplementary videos for a complete presentation of our approach. In summary, 

AlbedoEdit demonstrates strong and robust editing results both qualitatively and quantitatively within a unified editing framework. 

5.4. Additional Experiments 

Effect of emission We study the effect of illumination on inserted objects in the VOI-Relit task. As demonstrated in the left part of Fig. 9, we relight the edited video using Dif-Edited Albedo Wan-1.3B Wan-14B Relit Video Albedo of Relit Video Output Source Video Edited Video Scene 1 Scene 2 

Figure 9. Left: We demonstrate the effect of inserting objects that should plausibly be emissive; the model correctly infers this. Right: using a smaller base model (Wan 1.3B) on the insertion task leads to noticeably lower quality. 

fusionRender [27] to obtain relit videos, from which albedo maps are extracted and utilized for another round of VOI. In the example shown in Fig. 9, even though the extracted albedo of the lantern differs between the two examples, the final outputs match the original edited video and the in-serted relit objects remain physically plausible. Additional VOI-Relit results are presented in Fig. 7, where relit objects (e.g., chairs and ducks) are naturally harmonized into the source video. These experiments demonstrate the effective-ness of AlbedoEdit in tackling in-the-wild external object insertion. 

Effect of base model size We evaluate different video foundation models on our editing tasks. Specifically, we fine-tune the smaller Wan-1.3B-T2V model on the same dataset; note that our main results use the larger fine-tuned Wan-14B-T2V model. As shown in the right part of Fig. 9, the model fine-tuned from Wan-1.3B struggles to preserve the appearance of the source video, highlighting the bene-fits of larger models for such tasks. While larger models are more powerful, they also require more memory. 

5.5. Limitations and Future Work 

Our albedo guidance is currently applied to the first frame only. This is often beneficial, as editing the albedo of one frame is much easier for a user than the concurrent modifi-cation of multiple albedo frames with temporal coherence. However, it also prevents precise motion control; adding such control is an important remaining challenge. In addi-tion, the plausibility of the synthesized videos relies on the quality of the extracted albedo maps. In cases where reflec-tions or shadows of the object are mistakenly interpreted as albedo, AlbedoEdit may fail to remove the corresponding side effects, as shown in Fig. 10. Our current model supports short videos only, and our results use 50 diffusion steps, with no distillation. Autore-Input Video Edited Video Edited Albedo Before 

> After
> Before
> After

Figure 10. Limitation of our method. As shown in the figure, when side effects of edited objects are mistakenly counted as tex-ture (highlighted by the red arrow) in the albedo maps, our method fails to remove the corresponding side effects in the edited videos. 

gressive long-video approaches with distillation have been heavily explored recently and could be combined with our approach. 

# 6. Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduced AlbedoEdit , a unified frame-work for several video editing tasks: inserting new objects (VOI), removing existing ones (VOR), and changing tex-tures (VTE). Basing our guidance on albedo maps, which represent an object’s intrinsic appearance without the dis-traction of shadows and global illumination, allows the model to preserve the lighting of the original scene, en-suring that new edits include natural details like accurate shadows, highlights, and reflections that remain difficult for other methods. Our results show that AlbedoEdit produces comparable or higher quality and more consistent videos than previous specialized tools, which typically focus on one of the three tasks we support. Due to our careful construction of syn-thetic training data, the model generalizes well to real-world footage. We showed that the albedo map, an illumination-invariant intrinsic property, provides a robust conditioning signal to guide the editing process. We believe this ap-proach can inspire future tools to make generative video editing accessible, controllable and photorealistic. 

# References 

[1] R. Abdal, O. Patashnik, I. Skorokhodov, W. Menapace, A. Siarohin, S. Tulyakov, D. Cohen-Or, and K. Aberman. Dynamic concepts personalization from single videos. In 

Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers , pages 1–9, 2025. [2] Adobe Inc. Adobe photoshop. https://www.adobe. com/products/photoshop.html , 2026. [3] C. Bai, Z. Shao, G. Zhang, D. Liang, J. Yang, Z. Zhang, Y. Guo, C. Zhong, Y. Qiu, Z. Wang, et al. Anything in any scene: Photorealistic video object insertion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.17509 , 2024. [4] J. Bai, S. Bai, Y. Chu, Z. Cui, K. Dang, X. Deng, Y. Fan, W. Ge, Y. Han, F. Huang, et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609 , 2023. [5] S. Batifol, A. Blattmann, F. Boesel, S. Consul, C. Diagne, T. Dockhorn, J. English, Z. English, P. Esser, S. Kulal, et al. Flux. 1 kontext: Flow matching for in-context image genera-tion and editing in latent space. arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv– 2506, 2025. [6] Y. Bian, Z. Zhang, X. Ju, M. Cao, L. Xie, Y. Shan, and Q. Xu. Videopainter: Any-length video inpainting and editing with plug-and-play context control. In Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Tech-niques Conference Conference Papers , pages 1–12, 2025. [7] M. Deitke, D. Schwenk, J. Salvador, L. Weihs, O. Michel, E. VanderBilt, L. Schmidt, K. Ehsani, A. Kembhavi, and A. Farhadi. Objaverse: A universe of annotated 3d objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vi-sion and pattern recognition , pages 13142–13153, 2023. [8] P. Dhariwal and A. Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:8780–8794, 2021. [9] Y. Fang, T. Wu, V. Deschaintre, D. Ceylan, I. Georgiev, C.-H. P. Huang, Y. Hu, X. Chen, and T. Y. Wang. V-rgbx: Video editing with accurate controls over intrinsic properties. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.11799 , 2025. [10] Y. Fu, Y. Zheng, Z. Dai, and H. Ding. Effecterase: Joint video object removal and insertion for high-quality effect erasing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.19224 , 2026. [11] X. Gao, R. Li, X. Chen, Y. Wu, S. Feng, Q. Yin, and Z. Tu. Pisco: Precise video instance insertion with sparse control. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.08277 , 2026. [12] D. Garibi, S. Yadin, R. Paiss, O. Tov, S. Zada, A. Ephrat, T. Michaeli, I. Mosseri, and T. Dekel. Tokenverse: Versa-tile multi-concept personalization in token modulation space. 

ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG) , 44(4):1–11, 2025. [13] Z. Gu, R. Yan, J. Lu, P. Li, Z. Dou, C. Si, Z. Dong, Q. Liu, C. Lin, Z. Liu, et al. Diffusion as shader: 3d-aware video dif-fusion for versatile video generation control. In Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and In-teractive Techniques Conference Conference Papers , pages 1–12, 2025. [14] Y. HaCohen, B. Brazowski, N. Chiprut, Y. Bitterman, A. Kvochko, A. Berkowitz, D. Shalem, D. Lifschitz, D. Moshe, E. Porat, et al. Ltx-2: Efficient joint audio-visual foundation model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03233 , 2026. [15] H. He, Y. Xu, Y. Guo, G. Wetzstein, B. Dai, H. Li, and C. Yang. Cameractrl: Enabling camera control for text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02101 , 2024. [16] K. He, R. Liang, J. Munkberg, J. Hasselgren, N. Vijaykumar, A. Keller, S. Fidler, I. Gilitschenski, Z. Gojcic, and Z. Wang. Unirelight: Learning joint decomposition and synthesis for video relighting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15673 , 2025. [17] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel. Denoising diffusion proba-bilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. [18] W. Hong, M. Ding, W. Zheng, X. Liu, and J. Tang. Cogvideo: Large-scale pretraining for text-to-video gener-ation via transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15868 ,2022. [19] Z. Huang, Y. He, J. Yu, F. Zhang, C. Si, Y. Jiang, Y. Zhang, T. Wu, Q. Jin, N. Chanpaisit, Y. Wang, X. Chen, L. Wang, D. Lin, Y. Qiao, and Z. Liu. VBench: Comprehensive bench-mark suite for video generative models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024. [20] Z. Jiang, Z. Han, C. Mao, J. Zhang, Y. Pan, and Y. Liu. Vace: All-in-one video creation and editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-sion , pages 17191–17202, 2025. [21] H. Jin, H. Jang, J. Kim, J. Hyung, K. Kim, D. Kim, H. Choi, H. Kim, and J. Choo. Insertanywhere: Bridging 4d scene geometry and diffusion models for realistic video object in-sertion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.17504 , 2025. [22] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013. [23] W. Kong, Q. Tian, Z. Zhang, R. Min, Z. Dai, J. Zhou, J. Xiong, X. Li, B. Wu, J. Zhang, et al. Hunyuanvideo: A sys-tematic framework for large video generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.03603 , 2024. [24] M. Ku, C. Wei, W. Ren, H. Yang, and W. Chen. Anyv2v: A tuning-free framework for any video-to-video editing tasks. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.14468 , 2024. [25] Y.-C. Lee, Z. Zhang, J. Huang, J.-H. Wang, J.-Y. Lee, J.-B. Huang, E. Shechtman, and Z. Li. Generative video motion editing with 3d point tracks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.02015 , 2025. [26] X. Li, H. Xue, P. Ren, and L. Bo. Diffueraser: Adiffusion model for video inpainting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.10018 , 2025. [27] R. Liang, Z. Gojcic, H. Ling, J. Munkberg, J. Hasselgren, C.-H. Lin, J. Gao, A. Keller, N. Vijaykumar, S. Fidler, et al. Dif-fusion renderer: Neural inverse and forward rendering with video diffusion models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 26069– 26080, 2025. [28] C. Lin, H. Liu, Q. Lin, Z. Bright, S. Tang, Y. He, M. Liu, L. Zhu, and C. Le. Objaverse++: Curated 3D Object Dataset with Quality Annotations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Work-shops , pages 6813–6822, 2025. [29] Y. Lipman, R. T. Chen, H. Ben-Hamu, M. Nickel, and M. Le. Flow matching for generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747 , 2022. [30] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regu-larization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101 , 2017. [31] L. Lyu, V. Deschaintre, Y. Hold-Geoffroy, M. Haˇ san, J. S. Yoon, T. Leimk¨ uhler, C. Theobalt, and I. Georgiev. Intrin-sicedit: Precise generative image manipulation in intrinsic space. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 44(4):1–13, 2025. [32] X. Ma, V. Deschaintre, M. Haˇ san, F. Luan, K. Zhou, H. Wu, and Y. Hu. Materialpicker: Multi-modal dit-based mate-rial generation. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 44(4):1–12, July 2025. ISSN 1557-7368. doi: 10.1145/3731199. URL 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3731199 .[33] C. Miao, Y. Feng, J. Zeng, Z. Gao, H. Liu, Y. Yan, D. Qi, X. Chen, B. Wang, and H. Zhao. Rose: Remove objects with side effects in videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18633 ,2025. [34] S. Motamed, W. Harvey, B. Klein, L. Van Gool, Z. Yuan, and T.-Y. Cheng. Void: Video object and interaction deletion. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.02296 , 2026. [35] W. Peebles and S. Xie. Scalable diffusion models with trans-formers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international con-ference on computer vision , pages 4195–4205, 2023. [36] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learn-ing , pages 8748–8763. PmLR, 2021. [37] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Om-mer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffu-sion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 10684– 10695, 2022. [38] N. Saini, N. Bodla, A. Shrivastava, A. Ravichandran, X. Zhang, A. Shrivastava, and B. Singh. Invi: Object in-sertion in videos using off-the-shelf diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10958 , 2024. [39] J. Shin, Z. Li, R. Zhang, J.-Y. Zhu, J. Park, E. Shecht-man, and X. Huang. Motionstream: Real-time video gen-eration with interactive motion controls. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.01266 , 2025. [40] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli. Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilib-rium thermodynamics. In International conference on ma-chine learning , pages 2256–2265. pmlr, 2015. [41] A. Van Den Oord, O. Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete represen-tation learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [42] T. Wan, A. Wang, B. Ai, B. Wen, C. Mao, C.-W. Xie, D. Chen, F. Yu, H. Zhao, J. Yang, et al. Wan: Open and ad-vanced large-scale video generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20314 , 2025. [43] B. Wang, X. Chen, M. Gadelha, and Z. Cheng. Frame in-n-out: Unbounded controllable image-to-video generation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21491 , 2025. [44] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing , 13(4): 600–612, 2004. [45] C. Wei, Q. Liu, Z. Ye, Q. Wang, X. Wang, P. Wan, K. Gai, and W. Chen. Univideo: Unified understanding, generation, and editing for videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.08377 ,2025. [46] T. Wiedemer, Y. Li, P. Vicol, S. S. Gu, N. Matarese, K. Swersky, B. Kim, P. Jaini, and R. Geirhos. Video mod-els are zero-shot learners and reasoners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20328 , 2025. [47] Z. Yang, J. Teng, W. Zheng, M. Ding, S. Huang, J. Xu, Y. Yang, W. Hong, X. Zhang, G. Feng, et al. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06072 , 2024. [48] Z. Ye, X. He, Q. Liu, Q. Wang, X. Wang, P. Wan, D. Zhang, K. Gai, Q. Chen, and W. Luo. Unic: Unified in-context video editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.04216 , 2025. [49] M. Yu, W. Hu, J. Xing, and Y. Shan. Trajectorycrafter: Redi-recting camera trajectory for monocular videos via diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international con-ference on computer vision , pages 100–111, 2025. [50] X. Yu, T. Wang, S. Y. Kim, P. Guerrero, X. Chen, Q. Liu, Z. Lin, and X. Qi. Objectmover: Generative object move-ment with video prior. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 17682–17691, 2025. [51] Z. Zeng, V. Deschaintre, I. Georgiev, Y. Hold-Geoffroy, Y. Hu, F. Luan, L.-Q. Yan, and M. Haˇ san. Rgb¡-¿x: Image decomposition and synthesis using material- and lighting-aware diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers , SIGGRAPH ’24, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400705250. doi: 10.1145/3641519.3657445. URL 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3641519.3657445 .[52] L. Zhang, A. Rao, and M. Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision ,pages 3836–3847, 2023. [53] R. Zhang, P. Isola, A. A. Efros, E. Shechtman, and O. Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a percep-tual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on com-puter vision and pattern recognition , pages 586–595, 2018. [54] Y. Zhang, K. T´ othov´ a, Z. Wang, K. Yin, H. Turki, R. de Lu-tio, Y.-Y. Chang, O. Litany, S. Fidler, and Z. Gojcic. Dif-fusionharmonizer: Bridging neural reconstruction and pho-torealistic simulation with online diffusion enhancer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.24096 , 2026. [55] Q. Zhao, Z. Ma, and P. Zhou. Dreaminsert: Zero-shot image-to-video object insertion from a single image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10342 , 2025. [56] S. Zhou, C. Li, K. C. Chan, and C. C. Loy. Propainter: Im-proving propagation and transformer for video inpainting. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 10477–10486, 2023. [57] B. Zi, S. Zhao, X. Qi, J. Wang, Y. Shi, Q. Chen, B. Liang, R. Xiao, K.-F. Wong, and L. Zhang. Cococo: Improving text-guided video inpainting for better consistency, controllability and compatibility. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pages 11067–11076, 2025.