Title: Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=yhgcRwJ9Dn

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

Ignacio Peis 1 2 Batuhan Koyuncu 3 4 Isabel Valera 3 Jes Frellsen 1 2 

# Abstract 

We introduce a novel generative framework for functions by integrating Implicit Neural Represen-tations (INRs) and Transformer-based hypernet-works into latent variable models. Unlike prior ap-proaches that rely on MLP-based hypernetworks with scalability limitations, our method employs a Transformer-based decoder to generate INR pa-rameters from latent variables, addressing both representation capacity and computational effi-ciency. Our framework extends latent diffusion models (LDMs) to INR generation by replacing standard decoders with a Transformer-based hy-pernetwork, which can be trained either from scratch or via hyper-transforming —a strategy that fine-tunes only the decoder while freezing the pre-trained latent space. This enables efficient adapta-tion of existing generative models to INR-based representations without requiring full retraining. We validate our approach across multiple modali-ties, demonstrating improved scalability, expres-siveness, and generalization over existing INR-based generative models. Our findings establish a unified and flexible framework for learning struc-tured function representations. 

# 1. Introduction 

Generative modelling has seen remarkable advances in re-cent years, with diffusion models achieving state-of-the-art performance across multiple domains, including images, videos, and 3D synthesis (Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Rombach et al., 2022). A key limitation of ex-isting generative frameworks, however, is their reliance on structured output representations, such as pixel grids, which constrain resolution and generalisation across data modal-             

> 1Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark 2Pioneer Centre for Artificial Intelligence, Copenhagen, Denmark 3Saarland University, Saarbr ¨ucken, Germany 4Zuse School ELIZA. Corre-spondence to: Ignacio Peis <ipeaz@dtu.dk >.
> Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).
> ×0.125 ×0.25 ×0.5×1×2×4

Figure 1: Samples from LDMI at multiple resolutions. ities. In contrast, Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) have emerged as a powerful alternative that parametrises sig-nals as continuous functions (Sitzmann et al., 2020; Milden-hall et al., 2021). By leveraging INRs, generative models can represent complex data distributions at arbitrary resolu-tions, yet learning expressive distributions over INR param-eters remains a fundamental challenge. A common approach to modelling distributions over INRs is to use hypernetworks (Ha et al., 2017), which generate the weights and biases of an INR conditioned on a latent code (Dupont et al., 2022b; Koyuncu et al., 2023). How-ever, MLP-based hypernetworks suffer from scalability bot-tlenecks, particularly when generating high-dimensional INRs, as direct parameter regression constrains flexibility and expressiveness. More recently, Transformer-based hy-pernetworks have been proposed to alleviate these issues, introducing attention mechanisms to efficiently predict INR parameters (Chen & Wang, 2022; Zhmoginov et al., 2022). Nonetheless, existing approaches such as Trans-INR (Chen & Wang, 2022) remain deterministic, limiting their applica-bility in probabilistic frameworks. In this work, we introduce a novel framework for INR gen-eration, named Latent Diffusion Models of INRs ( LDMI ), that incorporates our proposed Hyper-Transformer Decoder (HD ), a probabilistic Transformer-based decoder for learn-ing distributions over INR parameters. Our approach com-bines the strengths of hypernetworks with recent advances in meta-learning for INRs while integrating into latent diffusion-based generative frameworks. Unlike previous 1Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

works, our HD decoder employs a full Transformer archi-tecture, where a Transformer Encoder processes latent vari-ables, and a Transformer Decoder generates INR parameters via cross-attention. This design enables flexible, probabilis-tic generation of neural representations across diverse data modalities, surpassing the deterministic limitations of prior Transformer-based hypernetworks (Chen & Wang, 2022; Zhmoginov et al., 2022). Our proposed framework, LDMI , supports two training paradigms: (i) full training, where the model is trained from scratch alongside a latent diffusion model (LDM; Rom-bach et al., 2022), and (ii) hyper-transforming, where a pre-trained LDM is adapted by replacing its decoder with the HD , allowing for efficient transfer learning without re-training the entire generative pipeline. This flexibility en-ables LDMI to scale effectively while leveraging existing pre-trained diffusion models. 

Contributions Our key contributions can be summarized as follows: • We introduce the HD decoder, a full Transformer-based probabilistic decoder for learning distributions over INR parameters. • We integrate our method into Latent Diffusion Models (Rombach et al., 2022), with support both full training and hyper-transforming , enabling efficient adaptation of pre-trained models. We refer to this approach as LDMI .• The HD decoder achieves scalability and generalisation across data modalities, overcoming the bottlenecks of MLP-based hypernetworks and extending beyond deter-ministic Transformer-based methods. • We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on var-ious generative tasks, showcasing its superiority in mod-elling high-resolution, structured data. By integrating probabilistic INR modelling within diffusion-based generative frameworks and efficient latent-to-parameters generation, our work establishes a new direc-tion for flexible and scalable generative modelling with unconstrained resolution. The following sections provide a detailed description of the background (Section 2), the proposed methodology (Section 3), and empirical results (Section 4). 

# 2. Background and Related Work 

2.1. Latent Diffusion Models 

Latent Diffusion Models (LDM; Rombach et al., 2022) are a class of generative models that learn efficient representations by applying diffusion processes in a compressed latent space. Unlike traditional diffusion models that operate directly in high-dimensional data spaces y ∈ RD to approximate p(y),LDMs first encode data into a lower-dimensional latent space z ∈ Rd, where d ≪ D, using a probabilistic encoder 

Eψ (·) to produce rich latent representations qψ (z|y). These are decoded via Dλ(·) to accurately recover data samples by modeling the conditional distribution pλ(y|z). A β-VAE (Higgins et al., 2017) with low β, a Vector-Quantized VAE (VQ-VAE; van den Oord et al., 2017), or VQGAN (Esser et al., 2021) are suitable choices for learning the structured latent space. Additionally, for image data, perceptual losses can be incorporated to further enhance generation quality (Larsen et al., 2016; Johnson et al., 2016; Hou et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy & Brox, 2016; Hou et al., 2019). In the second stage, LDMs approximate the aggregate poste-rior qψ (z) = R qψ (z|y)pdata (y) d y with a diffusion model 

pθ (z), shifting the generative modeling task from data space to latent space and significantly reducing computational cost. While both continuous-time SDE-based approaches (Song et al., 2021b) and discrete Markov chain formulations (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021a) are viable, we follow the DDPM-based approach as adopted in the original LDM implementation (Rombach et al., 2022). DDPMs (Ho et al., 2020) train using an objective de-rived from a variational lower bound on the negative log-likelihood, reparameterized for efficiency as a denoising task. This results in a simplified loss that closely resembles denoising score matching (Song et al., 2021b), and is widely used in state-of-the-art models (Saharia et al., 2022; Dhari-wal & Nichol, 2021). For latent diffusion, the loss is applied to z ∼ qψ (z|y), yielding: 

LDDPM = Ey,z,t,ϵ 

h

∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt, t )∥2i

, (1) where y ∼ pdata (y), z ∼ qψ (z|y), t ∼ U (1 , T ), and ϵ ∼N (0, I). This objective corresponds to predicting the added noise in a fixed forward process, effectively denoising zt

toward the original latent z.

Sampling In DDPM, the reverse posterior density is no longer Markovian and coincides with the inference model proposed later in DDIM (Song et al., 2021a). In DDIM, it is demonstrated that faster sampling can be achieved without retraining, simply by using the posterior approximation for the estimation ˆz, which re-defines the generative process as: 

pθ (zt−1|zt) = 

(

N   ˆz, σ 21 I if t = 1 

q  zt−1|zt, ˆz otherwise, (2) and uses that an estimation of ˆz can be computed by 

ˆz = fθ (zt, t ) = 1

√¯αt



zt − √1 − ¯αt · ϵθ (zt, t )



, (3) where ¯αt = Qti=1 αi. This formulation leads to improved efficiency using fewer steps. More details are provided in Appendix A.2. 2Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

2.2. Probabilistic Implicit Neural Representations 

Implicit Neural Representations (INRs; Sitzmann et al., 2020) model continuous functions by mapping coordi-nates x to output features y via a neural network fΦ(y|x)

(Mildenhall et al., 2021; Mescheder et al., 2019; Tancik et al., 2020). Recent generative approaches adapt this idea for flexible conditional generation at arbitrary resolutions (Dupont et al., 2022a; Koyuncu et al., 2023). Unlike mod-els that fit p(y) over structured data, INRs approximate the conditional p(y|x), allowing data sampling and uncer-tainty estimation at any location—especially beneficial for spatially-varying data. Probabilistic INR generation typically involves meta-learning hidden representations that are mapped to INR parameters Φ. The main challenge lies in learning these representations under uncertainty, with two goals: (i) em-bedding observed data into a posterior for conditional gener-ation, and (ii) sampling from a prior for synthesis. Koyuncu et al. (2023) address this via a latent variable z and a varia-tional framework combining a flow-based prior pθ (z) with an encoder qψ (z|x, y), using an MLP-based hypernetwork to map z to Φ (Ha et al., 2017). However, scaling to high-resolution images is limited by the complexity of the INR parameter space. Similarly, Dupont et al. (2022b) use ad-versarially trained hypernetworks, which improve stability but lack conditional generation and face the same scalability bottlenecks. Two recent strategies aim to address these issues. Functa (Dupont et al., 2022a; Bauer et al., 2023) learns neural fields per datapoint via optimization of modulation codes (referred to as functas ), then trains a generative model on the resulting 

functaset . Alternatively, Chen et al. (2024) leverage LDMs by pretraining an autoencoder (e.g., β-VAE or VQ-VAE) with an image renderer incorporated to the decoder, and applying a diffusion model on its latent space. 

2.3. Hyper-Transformers 

Hypernetworks (Ha et al., 2017) map latent representations 

z to INR parameters Φ = gϕ(z), where gϕ is a learned generator and fΦ(y|x) defines the INR. While the hyper-network is shared across the dataset, the INR is instance-specific, generated dynamically by the hypernetwork. This design, however, struggles with large INRs, as generating full parameter vectors introduces capacity and optimiza-tion bottlenecks. To overcome this, recent work has pro-posed Hyper-Transformers (Chen & Wang, 2022; Zhmogi-nov et al., 2022), which use attention to generate INR pa-rameters in modular chunks. This design avoids flattening and allows scalable, targeted weight generation. Building on this paradigm, recent work, (HyperDream-Booth; Ruiz et al., 2024) extends this idea by generating LoRA adapters for personalizing diffusion models from few examples. While their focus is efficient adaptation, our framework ( LDMI ) builds a full generative model over INR parameter space. Our Hyper-Transformer Decoder enables resolution-agnostic generation across modalities (images, 3D fields, climate data), representing a new direction in function-level generative modeling. Although prior methods succeed in deterministic reconstruc-tion, they do not support probabilistic generation or serve as decoders for latent variable models. Our approach addresses this by using full Transformer architectures conditioned on tensor-shaped latent variables. 

2.4. Function-valued Stochastic Processes 

Alternative approaches like Neural Diffusion Processes (NDPs) (Dutordoir et al., 2023) and Simformer (Gloeck-ler et al., 2024) define distributions over function values, not over network parameters. NDPs denoise function val-ues directly using permutation-invariant attention, mimick-ing Neural Processes, while Simformer learns a joint diffu-sion model over data and simulator parameters. In contrast, our method directly generates INR parameters via a hyper-transformer, offering continuous function generation with resolution independence. 

# 3. Methodology 

We introduce Latent Diffusion Models of Implicit Neural Representations ( LDMI ), a novel family of generative mod-els operating in function space. While previous probabilistic INR approaches have explored latent variable models for INRs (Koyuncu et al., 2023; Dupont et al., 2022b) and two-stage training schemes incorporating diffusion-based priors in the second stage (Park et al., 2023; Dupont et al., 2022a; Bauer et al., 2023), these methods face key limita-tions. Notably, MLP-based hypernetworks suffer from ca-pacity bottlenecks, while existing frameworks lack a unified and compact approach for handling diverse data modalities. To address these challenges, we propose the Hyper-Transformer Decoder ( HD ), which extends the flexibility of hypernetworks with the scalability of Transformer-based architectures. Unlike prior deterministic frameworks (Chen & Wang, 2022), HD introduces a probabilistic formulation, enabling uncertainty modelling and improved generative capacity for INRs. 

3.1. Notation 

We define F = {f : X → Y} as the space of continu-ous signals, where X represents the domain of coordinates, and Y the codomain of signal values, or features. Let D

be a dataset consisting of N pairs D .

= {(Xn, Yn)}Nn=1 .Here, Xn and Yn conform a signal as a collection of Dn

3Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

(a) Encoder. (b) INR Generation. Figure 2: Overview of the I-VAE . (a) The inference model, trained in the first stage, where an encoder maps data into the variational parameters of the approximate posterior; (b) The full decoder: the HD module transforms the latent variable into the weights and biases of an INR, enabling continuous signal representation. coordinates Xn

.

= {x(n) 

> i

}Dn

> i=1

, x(n) 

> i

∈ X and signal values 

Yn

.

= {y(n) 

> i

}Dn

> i=1

, y(n) 

> i

∈ Y .

3.2. Generative Model 

We aim to model the stochastic process that generates con-tinuous signals (X, Y ) using neural networks p(y|x; Φ) ≡

pΦ(y|x), known as Implicit Neural Representations (INRs). Unlike discrete representations such as pixel grids, INRs provide compact and differentiable function approximations, making them well-suited for a wide range of data modalities, including images (Chen et al., 2021), 3D shapes (Mescheder et al., 2019), and audio (Sitzmann et al., 2020), while inher-ently supporting unconstrained resolution. 

Implicit Neural Representation Previous works have demonstrated that even simple MLP-based architectures ex-hibit remarkable flexibility, accurately approximating com-plex signals. In this work, we define our INR as an MLP with L hidden layers: 

h0 = γ(x),

hl = σ(Wlhl−1 + bl), l = 1 , . . . , L, fΦ(x) = hL = WLhL−1 + bL.

(4) where γ denotes optional coordinate encoding, and σ is a non-linearity. The INR parameters are given by Φ = (Wl, bl)Ll=1 . The network parametrise a likelihood distribu-tion, λ, over the target signal, that is, 

pΦ(y|x) = λ(y; fΦ(x)) . (5) 

Challenges in Modeling INR Parameter Distributions 

Learning a generative model over the INR parameter space 

Φ is highly non-trivial due to two fundamental challenges. First, small perturbations in parameter space can result in drastic variations in the data space, making direct modelling difficult. Second, the dimensionality of the flattened pa-rameter vector Φ scales poorly with the INR’s width and depth, leading to significant computational and optimization challenges. A common approach in prior works (Koyuncu et al., 2023; Dupont et al., 2022b;a) is to model Φ implicitly using an auxiliary neural network known as a hypernetwork (Ha et al., 2017), typically MLP-based, which modulates the INR parameters based on a lower-dimensional latent repre-sentation: 

Φ = gϕ(z), (6) where z ∈ RHz ×Wz ×dz is a tensor-shaped latent code with spatial dimensions Hz × Wz and channel dimension dz .This latent space serves as a compressed representation of the continuous signal. However, MLP-based hypernet-works introduce a fundamental bottleneck: the final layer must output all parameters of the target INR, which leads to scalability issues when modulating high-capacity INRs. As a result, prior works employing MLP-based hypernet-works typically use small INR architectures, often restricted to three-layer MLPs (Koyuncu et al., 2023; Dupont et al., 2022b). Additionally, these works rely on standard MLPs with ReLU or similar activations and often preprocess co-ordinates using Random Fourier Features (RFF) (Tancik et al., 2020) to capture high-frequency details. However, RFF-based embeddings struggle to generalize to unseen coordinates without careful validation. In contrast, SIREN (Sitzmann et al., 2020) inherently captures the full frequency spectrum by incorporating sinusoidal activations, making it more effective for super-resolution tasks. However, using SIREN as the INR module introduces fur-ther challenges. As commented by their authors, optimizing SIRENs with not carefully chosen uniformly distributed weights yields poor performance both in accuracy and in convergence speed. This issue worsens when the weights are not optimized, but generated by a hypernetwork. To overcome these limitations, we introduce the Hyper-Transformer Decoder ( HD ), a Transformer-based hypernet-work designed to scale effectively while preserving the flex-ibility of larger INRs and ensuring proper modulation of SIREN weights. 3.2.1. H YPER -T RANSFORMER DECODER 

The Hyper-Transformer Decoder ( HD ) is a central compo-nent of our autoencoding framework for generating INRs, referred to as I-VAE and illustrated in Figure 2. Its inter-4Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

Figure 3: Diagram of the Hyper-Transformer Decoder ( HD ). The latent variable z is tokenized and processed by a Transformer Encoder. A Transformer Decoder, initialized with learnable grouped weights ¯Wi

> l

, cross-attends to the latent tokens to generate the set of grouped weights Wo 

> l

. The full weight matrices Wl are then reconstructed by combining the grouped weights with learnable template weights ¯Wb 

> l

. Biases bl are learned as global parameters. nal architecture is detailed in Figure 3. Mathematically, it is defined as a function of the latent tensor that produces the parameters Φ = gϕ(z) of the INR. We elaborate on previous work that proposed Vision Transformers (Doso-vitskiy et al., 2021) for meta-learning of INR parameters from images (Chen & Wang, 2022), to design an efficient full Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) that processes latent variables into INR parameters. 

Tokenizer The HD decoder begins by splitting tensor-shaped latent variables into N patches zp ∈ RP 2×dz of fixed size (P, P ), where N = Hz · Wz /P 2. Each patch is then flattened and projected into a lower-dimensional em-bedding space using a shared linear transformation. The embedding for each patch serves as an input token for the Transformer. 

Transformer Encoder Following tokenization, the first half of the HD decoder, a Transformer Encoder, applies multi-head self-attention mechanism, repeated for several layers, outputting tokenized embeddings that we referred to as latent tokens .

Transformer Decoder Unlike prior work (Chen & Wang, 2022) that only employs Transformer Encoders, we intro-duce a Transformer Decoder that cross-attends to latent tokens to generate output tokens, which are then mapped to the column weights of the INR weight matrices. The input to the Transformer Decoder consists of a globally shared, learnable set of initial weight tokens, denoted as ¯Wi, which serve as queries. The decoder processes these queries via cross-attention with the latent tokens, which act as keys and values to obtain the output set of column weights, Wo.

Weight Grouping Following Chen et al. (2021), we adopt a similar weight grouping strategy to balance precision and computational efficiency in INR parameter generation. How-ever, our approach differs in the reconstruction strategy ap-plied to the Transformer-generated weights. Let W ∈ Rdout ×din represent a weight matrix of an INR layer (omitting the layer index l for simplicity), where each column is denoted as wc for c ∈ { 1, . . . , d in }. Directly mapping a Transformer token to every column is compu-tationally expensive, as it would require processing long sequences. Instead, we define G groups per weight matrix, where each group represents k = din  

> G

columns (assuming divisibility). This results in a Transformer working with grouped weight matrices ¯Wi, Wo ∈ Rdout ×G, since ¯Wi

(input tokens) and Wo (output tokens) have the same di-mensions. The full weight matrix is reconstructed as: 

wc = R(wo

> ⌈c/k ⌉

, ¯wb

> c

) (7) where R is the reconstruction operator, wc denotes the 

cth column of W, and ¯wb 

> c

is the corresponding column of 

¯Wb ∈ Rdout ×din —a set of learnable base parameters that serve as a weight template. In Trans-INR (Chen & Wang, 2022), the Transformer-based hypernetwork generates normalized weights using the fol-lowing reconstruction method: 

R(norm) 

wo

> ⌈c/k ⌉

, ¯wb

> c



= wo 

> ⌈c/k ⌉

⊙ ¯wb

> c

wo 

> ⌈c/k ⌉

⊙ ¯wb

> c

. (8) However, we found this approach unsuitable for generating weights in INRs with periodic activations. We hypothesize that the normalization in Equation (8) causes the resulting weights and their gradients to vanish when || wo

> ⌈c/k ⌉

|| ≈ 0,leading to training instability. To address this, we introduce a new reconstruction oper-ator that removes the normalization constraint, yielding significantly more stable training, particularly for INRs with periodic activations: 

R(scale ) 

wo

> ⌈c/k ⌉

, ¯wb

> c



= (1 + wo

> ⌈c/k ⌉

) ⊙ ¯wb

> c

. (9) This formulation ensures that when || wo

> ⌈c/k ⌉

|| ≈ 0, the base weights remain unchanged, preventing instability in the generated INR parameters. 5Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

It is essential to distinguish between the two sets of globally shared learnable parameters. The sequence ¯Wi 

> 1: L

(of length 

G × L) serves as the initialization for the grouped weight tokens and is provided as input to the Transformer Decoder. In contrast, the sequence ¯Wb 

> 1: L

(of length din × L) acts as a global reference for the full set of INR weights and is used exclusively for the reconstruction in Equation (9). This weight grouping mechanism allows the HD decoder to dynamically adjust the trade-off between precision and efficiency by tuning G. As a result, our method scales ef-fectively across different model sizes while preserving the benefits of Transformer-based hypernetwork parameteriza-tion. 

3.3. Variational Inference 

Given our implicit modelling of INR parameters, the objec-tive is to learn a structured and compact probabilistic latent space pθ (z) that enables meaningful posterior inference via Bayesian principles. Specifically, we seek to approximate the true posterior p(z|X, Y ), facilitating accurate and flex-ible inference. To achieve this, we extend the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) framework (Kingma & Welling, 2013) to the efficient generation of INRs, which we refer to as 

I-VAE (depicted in Figure 2). The complexity of the likelihood function makes the true posterior p(z|X, Y ) intractable. To address this, VAEs in-troduce an encoder network that approximates the posterior through a learned variational distribution. Our encoder, de-noted as Eψ (X, Y ), processes both coordinate inputs X

and signal values Y , outputting the parameters of a Gaus-sian approximation: 

qψ (z|X, Y ) = N  z; Eψ (X, Y ) . (10) This formulation enables training via amortized variational inference, optimising a lower bound on the log-marginal likelihood log p(Y |X), known as the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO): 

LVAE (ϕ, ψ ) = Eqψ (z|X,Y )

log pΦ(Y |X)

− β · DKL 

 qψ (z|X, Y ) ∥ p(z) , (11) where we omit the explicit dependence of Φ on ϕ and z for clarity. The hyperparameter β, introduced by Higgins et al. (2017), controls the trade-off between reconstruction fidelity and latent space regularization, regulating the amount of information compression in the latent space. The case β = 1 

corresponds to the standard definition of the ELBO. During the first stage of training, following LDMs (Rom-bach et al., 2022), we impose a simplistic standard Gaussian prior p(z) = N (0, I), and we set a low β value to en-courage high reconstruction accuracy while promoting a structured latent space that preserves local continuity. This 

Figure 4: Schematic of the DDIM-based latent diffusion. choice facilitates smooth interpolations and improves the quality of inferred representations. In addition, following Rombach et al. (2022), for the case of images, we incorporate perception losses (Zhang et al., 2018), and patch-based (Isola et al., 2017) adversarial ob-jectives (Dosovitskiy & Brox, 2016; Esser et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022). However, while this training strategy ensures effective infer-ence, direct generation remains poor due to the discrepancy between the expressive encoder distribution and the simplis-tic Gaussian prior. To address this mismatch, we introduce a second training stage, where a diffusion-based model is fitted to the marginal posterior distribution, enhancing the generative capacity of the learned latent space. 

3.4. Latent Diffusion 

In this stage, we leverage the pre-trained I-VAE and the highly structured latent space encoding INRs to fit a DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) to the aggregate posterior: 

qψ (z) = Epdata (X,Y )

qψ (z|X, Y ) . (12) In other words, we fit a learnable prior over the latent space to approximate the structured posterior induced by the en-coder. Specifically, we minimize the Kullback-Leibler di-vergence 

DKL 

 qψ (z) ∥ pθ (z) , (13) where pθ (z) represents the learned diffusion-based prior over the latent space. We instantiate the following variation of the Denoising Score Matching (DSM; Vincent, 2011) objective presented in Equation (1): 

LDDPM = EX,Y ,z,ϵ,t 

h

λ(t)∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt, t )∥2i

, (14) which is approximated via Monte Carlo sampling. Specifi-cally, we draw (X, Y ) ∼ pdata (X, Y ), z ∼ qψ (z|X, Y ),

ϵ ∼ N (0, I), and t ∼ U (1 , T ), where T denotes the num-ber of diffusion steps. The weighting function λ(t) mod-ulates the training objective; in our case, we set λ(t) = 1 ,corresponding to an unweighted variational bound that en-hances sample quality. The complete training procedure for 

LDMI is outlined in Appendix B. 6Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

> GASP Functa Ours

(a) CelebA-HQ 64 × 64 

> Ours

(b) CelebA-HQ 256 × 256 

Figure 5: Uncurated samples from GASP, Functa (diffusion-based) and our LDMI trained with CelebA-HQ at 64 ×64 resolution (a). In (b), our model was trained on CelebA-HQ at 256 ×256 using the hyper-transforming approach. 

3.5. Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

As an alternative to full training, we introduce a highly efficient approach for training LDMI when a pre-trained LDM for discretized data is available. In this setting, we eliminate the need for two-stage training by leveraging the structured latent space learned by the pre-trained LDM. Specifically, we freeze the VAE encoder and the LDM and train only the HD decoder to maximize the log-likelihood of the decoded outputs, using the objective 

LHT (ϕ) = Eqψ (z|X,Y )

log pΦ(Y |X) , (15) optionally combined with perceptual and adversarial objec-tives. The HD decoder is sufficiently expressive to extract meaningful information from the pre-trained latent space. We refer to this strategy as hyper-transforming , as it enables efficient adaptation of a standard LDM to an INR-based framework without retraining the latent encoder or diffusion prior. Notably, this approach is compatible with LDMs based on VAEs, VQVAEs, or VQGANs—since all that is required is access to a pre-trained encoder and diffusion model. The full procedure is outlined in Algorithm 1. 

# 4. Experiments 

4.1. Training Setup 

Depending on the nature of the data, we utilize different ar-chitectures for the encoder. For image and climate data, we employ ResNets (He et al., 2016), while for 3D occupancy data, we employ 3D-convolutional networks. Our evaluations 1 span multiple domains: (1) natural image datasets, including CelebA-HQ (Liu et al., 2015) at sev-eral resolutions and ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015); (2) 3D objects, specifically the Chairs subclass from the ShapeNet repository (Chang et al., 2015), which provides approximately 6,778 chair models for 3D reconstruction and shape analysis; and (3) polar climate data, using the ERA5 temperature dataset (Hersbach et al., 2019) to ana-lyze global climate dynamics. In our hyper-transforming setup, we leverage publicly available pre-trained Latent Dif-fusion Models from Rombach et al. (2022), specifically the LDM-VQ-4 variants trained on CelebA-HQ at 256 × 256 

resolution and ImageNet, respectively. 

4.2. Generation 

Figure 1 shows samples generated by LDMI across diverse data modalities and resolutions. To obtain these, we sam-ple from the latent diffusion model, decode the latents into INRs using our HD decoder, and evaluate the resulting func-tions on different coordinate grids. Notably, CelebA-HQ at 

(256 × 256) is a challenging dataset not addressed by prior baselines. In Figure 5, we provide samples from LDMI trained on CelebA at 64 ×64 and 256 ×256, demonstrating its ability to generate high-quality and diverse images across different scales, and the qualitative superiority against the baselines. Additionally, in Table 1, we report FID scores of our sam-

> 1The code for reproducing our experiments can be found at
> https://github.com/ipeis/LDMI .

7Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

> GT Functa VAMoH Ours

(a) CelebA-HQ (b) ERA5 (c) ShapeNet Chairs GT Ours 

(d) ImageNet (e) CelebA-HQ (256 × 256) 

Figure 6: Reconstructions from Functa (diffusion-based), VAMoH, and our LDMI compared to ground truth (GT) across three datasets (a)–(c). In (d) and (e) LDMI was trained by hyper-transforming pre-trained LDMs.                                  

> Model PSNR (dB) ↑FID ↓HN Params ↓
> CelebA-HQ (64 ×64)
> GASP (Dupont et al., 2022b) -7.42 25.7M Functa (Dupont et al., 2022a) ≤30.7 40.40 -VAMoH (Koyuncu et al., 2023) 23.17 66.27 25.7M
> LDMI 24.80 18.06 8.06M ImageNet (256 ×256)
> Spatial Functa (Bauer et al., 2023) ≤38.4 ≤8.5 -
> LDMI 20.69 6.94 102.78M

Table 1: Metrics on CelebA-HQ and ImageNet. ples for CelebA and ImageNet, highlighting the model’s performance in terms of image quality and reconstruction accuracy. Importantly, while GASP achieves a lower FID score on CelebA-HQ, it cannot perform reconstructions due to its adversarial design. In contrast, our LDMI supports both high-quality sampling and accurate reconstructions, as demonstrated in the following experiment. 

4.3. Reconstruction 

Figure 6 presents a qualitative comparison between origi-nal images from the test split and their reconstructions by our model. As shown in the figure, our model successfully preserves fine details and global structures across different images. On ImageNet, our model demonstrates robust re-construction performance across diverse object categories and scenes, including textures, object boundaries and colour distributions. Quantitative evaluations in Table 1 indicate competitive performance compared to existing INR-based generative models. For CelebA-HQ 64 × 64 , we achieve a PSNR value of 24 .80 dB, which compares competitively to the previous methods. The high PSNR score suggests there is mini-mal information loss during the encoding-decoding process while maintaining perceptual quality. It is important to note several key distinctions when interpreting the comparative results in this Table. While Functa exhibits higher PSNR val-ues, this advantage stems from its test-time optimization pro-cedure—fitting a separate modulation vector per test image using ground truth information—rather than the amortized inference approach employed by our model. This funda-mental methodological difference undermines a direct com-parison, though we include these results for completeness. As for generation, our model enables seamless reconstruc-tion at arbitrary resolutions. Figures 9 and 10 show re-sults from LDMI trained on CelebA-HQ at (256 × 256) and 

(64 × 64) , respectively. To achieve this, we encode the observations, sample from the posterior distribution, and transform these latent samples into INRs using our HD de-8Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

coder. The resulting INRs are then evaluated on grids of varying resolutions to produce reconstructions ranging from 

×1/8 to ×4. Importantly, such flexible resolution control is not supported by methods like GASP, which cannot perform reconstructions due to their adversarial design. To further validate our claims regarding cross-modality generalization, we evaluate LDMI on two additional, di-verse datasets: ShapeNet Chairs and ERA5 climate data. As shown in Table 2, while Functa achieves better per-formance on Chairs—possibly due to being optimization-based— LDMI attains higher reconstruction quality than VA-MoH (inference-based) across both datasets, outperforming it by 0.5% on Chairs and 5.6 dB on ERA5. The substantial performance gain on the ERA5 climate dataset highlights 

LDMI ’s exceptional capability in representing complex, con-tinuous spatio-temporal signals beyond standard visual data, further supporting our argument for a truly general-purpose INR-based generative framework.             

> Model Chairs (%) ↑ERA5 (dB) ↑
> Functa (Dupont et al., 2022a) 99.51 34.9 VAMoH (Koyuncu et al., 2023) 96.75 39.0
> LDMI 97.25 44.6

Table 2: Reconstruction quality (accuracy in % and PSNR in dB) on ShapeNet Chairs and ERA5 climate data, demon-strating LDMI ’s strong generalization capabilities across modalities. Note that GASP is omitted as it is not applicable to INR reconstruction tasks. The dual capability of high-quality generation and accurate reconstruction positions LDMI as a versatile foundation for various downstream tasks requiring both generative and reconstructive abilities, a unique advantage over specialized alternatives optimized for only one of these objectives. 

4.4. Hyper-Transforming 

On ImageNet and CelebA-HQ at 256 × 256 , our LDMI was trained using the hyper-transforming strategy. As discussed in Section 3.5, instead of training the model from scratch, we reuse the encoder and diffusion model from a pre-trained LDM, training only the Hyper-Transformer Decoder. This approach leverages both the structured latent space learned by the autoencoder and the diffusion model already fitted to it. Training then focuses solely on transforming latent codes into the function space of INR parameters, enabling efficient specialization without retraining the generative backbone. Our method is agnostic to the latent encoder—VAE, VQ-VAE, or VQGAN—highlighting the flexibility of the hyper-transforming framework. These results demonstrate its scal-ability for INR-based synthesis and adaptation of pre-trained LDMs to resolution-agnostic generation. Input Samples 

Figure 7: Conditional inpainting results on CelebA-HQ at 

256 × 256 . The second and third rows present two con-ditional samples generated by our LDMI for the missing regions at the centre. 

4.5. Data Completion 

We evaluate our model on structured completion tasks, where parts of the input are masked with predefined pat-terns. For each case, we show the masked input and two samples drawn from the posterior. As shown in Figure 7, the model uses visible context to produce realistic, coherent outputs. On CelebA-HQ 256 × 256 , it reconstructs missing features—such as eyes, mouth, or hairline—while preserv-ing consistency with the unmasked regions. These results highlight its ability to generalize from partial observations. 

# 5. Conclusion 

We introduced Latent Diffusion Models of Implicit Neural Representations ( LDMI ), a framework that combines the expressiveness of INRs with the generative power of Latent Diffusion Models. Our hyper-transforming approach al-lows efficient adaptation of pre-trained LDMs to INR-based generation without retraining the full model. Experiments on CelebA-HQ, ImageNet, ShapeNet Chairs, and ERA5 demonstrate strong performance in both quantitative and qualitative evaluations. Importantly, LDMI overcomes limitations of prior hypernet-works through a modular, probabilistic Transformer decoder that supports scalable, expressive INR generation. While MLP-based methods struggle with dense parameter outputs and Transformer-based ones are typically deterministic, our design enables probabilistic modelling and efficient synthe-sis. Integrating INRs with latent diffusion yields a flexible, resolution-agnostic framework—advancing generative tasks requiring structural consistency, fidelity, and scalability. 9Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

# Acknowledgements 

This research was supported by the Villum Foundation through the Synergy project number 50091, by the Novo Nordisk Foundation through the Center for Basic Ma-chine Learning Research in Life Science (MLLS, grant NNF20OC0062606) and by the European Union (ERC-2021-STG, SAML, 101040177). Ignacio Peis acknowledges support by Danish Data Science Academy, which is funded by the Novo Nordisk Foundation (NNF21SA0069429). Batuhan Koyuncu is supported by the Konrad Zuse School of Excellence in Learning and Intelligent Systems (ELIZA) through the DAAD programme Konrad Zuse Schools of Excellence in Artificial Intelligence, sponsored by the Federal Ministry of Education. The views and opinions expressed are those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible. 

# Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

# References 

Bauer, M., Dupont, E., Brock, A., Rosenbaum, D., Schwarz, J. R., and Kim, H. Spatial Functa: Scaling Functa to ImageNet Classification and Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03130 , 2023. Chang, A. X., Funkhouser, T., Guibas, L., Hanrahan, P., Huang, Q., Li, Z., Savarese, S., Savva, M., Song, S., Su, H., Xiao, J., Yi, L., and Yu, F. ShapeNet: An Information-Rich 3D Model Repository. Technical Re-port arXiv:1512.03012 [cs.GR], Stanford University — Princeton University — Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, 2015. Chen, Y. and Wang, X. Transformers as Meta-Learners for Implicit Neural Representations. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 170–187. Springer, 2022. Chen, Y., Liu, S., and Wang, X. Learning Continuous Image Representation with Local Implicit Image Function. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 8628–8638, 2021. Chen, Y., Wang, O., Zhang, R., Shechtman, E., Wang, X., and Gharbi, M. Image Neural Field Diffusion Models. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 8007–8017, 2024. Dhariwal, P. and Nichol, A. Diffusion Models Beat GANs on Image Synthesis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 34, pp. 8780–8794, 2021. Dosovitskiy, A. and Brox, T. Generating Images with Per-ceptual Similarity Metrics Based on Deep Networks. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol-ume 29, 2016. Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., et al. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2021. Dupont, E., Kim, H., Eslami, S. A., Rezende, D. J., and Rosenbaum, D. From data to functa: Your data point is a function and you can treat it like one. In Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 5694–5725. PMLR, 2022a. Dupont, E., Teh, Y. W., and Doucet, A. Generative Models as Distributions of Functions. In International Confer-ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pp. 2989– 3015. PMLR, 2022b. Dutordoir, V., Saul, A., Ghahramani, Z., and Simpson, F. Neural Diffusion Processes. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 8990–9012. PMLR, 2023. Esser, P., Rombach, R., and Ommer, B. Taming Transform-ers for High-Resolution Image Synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 12873–12883, 2021. Gloeckler, M., Deistler, M., Weilbach, C. D., Wood, F., and Macke, J. H. All-in-one Simulation-based Inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 15735–15766. PMLR, 2024. Ha, D., Dai, A. M., and Le, Q. V. Hypernetworks. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2017. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep Residual Learn-ing for Image Recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pp. 770–778, 2016. Hersbach, H., Bell, B., Berrisford, P., Biavati, G., Hor ´anyi, A., Mu ˜noz Sabater, J., Nicolas, J., Peubey, C., Radu, R., Rozum, I., et al. ERA5 Monthly Averaged Data on Single Levels from 1979 to Present. Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) Climate Data Store (CDS) , 10:252–266, 2019. 10 Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

Higgins, I., Matthey, L., Pal, A., Burgess, C., Glorot, X., Botvinick, M., Mohamed, S., and Lerchner, A. β-VAE: Learning Basic Visual Concepts with a Constrained Varia-tional Framework. In International Conference on Learn-ing Representations , 2017. Ho, J., Jain, A., and Abbeel, P. Denoising Diffusion Proba-bilistic Models. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. Hou, X., Shen, L., Sun, K., and Qiu, G. Deep Feature Con-sistent Variational Autoencoder. In 2017 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) ,pp. 1133–1141. IEEE, 2017. Hou, X., Sun, K., Shen, L., and Qiu, G. Improving Vari-ational Autoencoder with Deep Feature Consistent and Generative Adversarial Training. Neurocomputing , 341: 183–194, 2019. Isola, P., Zhu, J.-Y., Zhou, T., and Efros, A. A. Image-to-Image Translation with Conditional Adversarial Net-works. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 1125–1134, 2017. Johnson, J., Alahi, A., and Fei-Fei, L. Perceptual Losses for Real-Time Style Transfer and Super-Resolution. In 

Computer Vision – ECCV 2016 , pp. 694–711. Springer, 2016. Kingma, D. P. and Welling, M. Auto-encoding Variational Bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013. Koyuncu, B., Martin, P. S., Peis, I., Olmos, P. M., and Valera, I. Variational mixture of hypergenerators for learning distributions over functions. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 17660–17683. PMLR, 2023. Larsen, A. B. L., Sønderby, S. K., Larochelle, H., and Winther, O. Autoencoding Beyond Pixels Using a Learned Similarity Metric. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 1558–1566. PMLR, 2016. Liu, Z., Luo, P., Wang, X., and Tang, X. Deep Learning Face Attributes in the Wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 3730– 3738, 2015. Mescheder, L., Oechsle, M., Niemeyer, M., Nowozin, S., and Geiger, A. Occupancy Networks: Learning 3D Re-construction in Function Space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 4460–4470, 2019. Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P. P., Tancik, M., Barron, J. T., Ramamoorthi, R., and Ng, R. NeRF: Representing Scenes as Neural Radiance Fields for View Synthesis. Commu-nications of the ACM , 65(1):99–106, 2021. Park, D., Kim, S., Lee, S., and Kim, H. J. DDMI: Domain-Agnostic Latent Diffusion Models for Synthesizing High-Quality Implicit Neural Representations. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., and Om-mer, B. High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 10684–10695, 2022. Ruiz, N., Li, Y., Jampani, V., Wei, W., Hou, T., Pritch, Y., Wadhwa, N., Rubinstein, M., and Aberman, K. Hyper-DreamBooth: HyperNetworks for Fast Personalization of Text-to-Image Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pp. 6527–6536, 2024. Russakovsky, O., Deng, J., Su, H., Krause, J., Satheesh, S., Ma, S., Huang, Z., Karpathy, A., Khosla, A., Bernstein, M., et al. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision ,115:211–252, 2015. Saharia, C., Ho, J., Chan, W., Salimans, T., Fleet, D. J., and Norouzi, M. Image Super-Resolution via Iterative Refinement. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 45(4):4713–4726, 2022. Sitzmann, V., Martel, J., Bergman, A., Lindell, D., and Wet-zstein, G. Implicit Neural Representations with Periodic Activation Functions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:7462–7473, 2020. Song, J., Meng, C., and Ermon, S. Denoising Diffusion Im-plicit Models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021a. Song, Y., Sohl-Dickstein, J., Kingma, D. P., Kumar, A., Er-mon, S., and Poole, B. Score-Based Generative Modeling through Stochastic Differential Equations. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2021b. Tancik, M., Srinivasan, P., Mildenhall, B., Fridovich-Keil, S., Raghavan, N., Singhal, U., Ramamoorthi, R., Barron, J., and Ng, R. Fourier Features Let Networks Learn High Frequency Functions in Low Dimensional Domains. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 33, pp. 7537–7547, 2020. van den Oord, A., Vinyals, O., and kavukcuoglu, k. Neural Discrete Representation Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30, 2017. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L. u., and Polosukhin, I. Atten-tion Is All You Need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30, 2017. 11 Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

Vincent, P. A Connection Between Score Matching and Denoising Autoencoders. Neural Computation , 23(7): 1661–1674, 2011. Yu, J., Li, X., Koh, J. Y., Zhang, H., Pang, R., Qin, J., Ku, A., Xu, Y., Baldridge, J., and Wu, Y. Vector-Quantized Im-age Modeling with Improved VQGAN. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. Zhang, R., Isola, P., Efros, A. A., Shechtman, E., and Wang, O. The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Deep Features as a Perceptual Metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pp. 586–595, 2018. Zhmoginov, A., Sandler, M., and Vladymyrov, M. Hyper-Transformer: Model Generation for Supervised and Semi-Supervised Few-Shot Learning. In International Confer-ence on Machine Learning , pp. 27075–27098. PMLR, 2022. 12 Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

# A. Background Extension 

A.1. Autoencoding-based Models 

When opting by β-VAE (Higgins et al., 2017) for the first stage of LDMs (Rombach et al., 2022), a weak regularization encourages accurate likelihoods pλ(y|z) parameterized by the decoder Dλ(·) while preserving latent expressiveness. This is achieved by assuming p(z) = N (0, I) and maximizing the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO): 

LVAE = Eqψ (z|y)

log pλ(y|z) − β · DKL 

 qψ (z|y) ∥ p(z) (16) and setting β is set to a small value to encourage accurate reconstructions. In contrast, VQVAE replaces the continuous latent representation with a discrete codebook. During training, the encoder output is quantized using the closest embedding from the codebook, enabling a more structured representation. The objective becomes: 

LVQVAE = ∥y − Dλ(Eϕ(y)) ∥2 + ∥sg [Eϕ(y)] − z∥2 + ∥sg [z] − Eϕ(y)∥2 (17) where sg [·] indicates a stop-gradient operation that prevents the encoder from directly updating the codebook embeddings. 

A.2. Diffusion Models 

In DDPM, the forward diffusion process incrementally corrupts the observed variable z0 using a Markovian noise process with latent variables z1: T

q(z1: T |z0) := 

> T

Y

> t=1

q(zt|zt−1), (18) where q(zt|zt−1) := N (zt; √1 − βtzt−1, β tI), and βt is a noise schedule controlling the variance at each time step. The reverse generative process is defined by the following Markov chain 

pθ (z0: T ) := p(zT )

> T

Y

> t=1

pθ (zt−1|zt) (19) where pθ (zt−1|zt) := N  μθ (zt, t ), σ2

> t

 is defined as a Gaussian whose mean 

μθ (zt, t ) = 1

√αt



zt − βt

√1 − ¯αt

ϵθ (zt, t )



(20) is obtained by a neural network that predicts the added noise using a neural network ϵθ (zt, t ).A more suitable inference distribution for ending with a compact objective can be expressed via the reverse posterior conditioning on the observation z0:

q(zt−1|zt, z0) = N



zt−1; ˜ μt (zt, z0) , ˜βtI



, (21) The model is learned by minimizing the variational bound on negative log-likelihood, which can be expressed as a sum of terms, 

LDDPM =

> const

z }| {

DKL 

 q(zT |z0) ∥ p(zT ) +

> L0

z }| {

− log p(z0|z1) + 

DKL 

 q(zt−1|zt, z0) ∥ pθ (zt−1|zt)| {z }

> Lt−1

(22) Efficient training is achieved by uniformly sampling t ∼ U (1 , T ) and optimizing the corresponding Lt−1, which, by deriving Equation (22), can be further simplified to a denoising score-matching loss: 

LDDPM = Ez0,t,ϵ 

h

∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt, t )∥2i

(23) where ϵ ∼ N (0 , I).13 Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

A.2.1. I NFERENCE 

The reverse posterior density defined in Equation (21) is no longer Markovian and coincides with the inference model proposed in DDIM (Song et al., 2021a), where it is demonstrated that faster sampling can be achieved without retraining, simply by redefining the generative process as: 

pθ (zt−1|zt) = 



N



f (1)  

> θ

(z1) , σ 21 I



if t = 1 

qσ



zt−1|zt, f (t) 

> θ

(zt)



otherwise, (24) and considering that an estimation of ˆz0 = fθ (zt, t ) can be computed as: 

fθ (zt, t ) = 1

√¯αt



zt − √1 − ¯αt · ϵθ (zt, t )



, (25) where ¯αt = Qti=1 αi. This formulation enables deterministic sampling with improved efficiency using fewer steps. 

# B. Training LDMI 

Algorithm 1 Hyper-Transforming LDM 

Input: Dataset {(Xi, Yi)}Ni=1 , pre-trained LDM (frozen encoder Eψ , frozen diffusion model pθ ), Hyper-Transformer decoder pΦ

repeat 

Sample batch (X, Y ) ∼ pdata (X, Y )

Sample latent using frozen encoder: z ∼ qψ (z|Xm, Ym)

Compute likelihood loss: LHT (ϕ) using Equation (15) 

if image data then 

Add perceptual loss: Lpercept 

Add adversarial loss: Ladv 

end if 

Update decoder parameters ϕ to minimize total loss 

until convergence 

Algorithm 2 Training LDMI 

Input: Dataset (Xi, Yi)i = 1 N , encoder Eψ , decoder pΦ, diffusion model pθ

Stage 1 : Training I-VAE 

repeat 

Sample batch (X, Y ) ∼ pdata (X, Y )

Sample latent: z ∼ qψ (z|X, Y )

Compute ELBO loss: LVAE (ϕ, ψ ) using Equation (11) 

if image data then 

Add perceptual loss: Lpercept 

Add adversarial loss: Ladv 

end if 

Update parameters ϕ, ψ to minimize total loss 

until convergence 

Stage 2 : Training DDPM 

repeat 

Sample batch (X, Y ) ∼ pdata (X, Y )

Sample latent: z ∼ qψ (z|X, Y )

Sample noise: ϵ ∼ N (0, I)

Sample timestep: t ∼ U (1 , T )

Compute DDPM loss: LDDPM using Equation (14) Update parameters θ to minimize LDDPM 

until convergence 

14 Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

In addition to the hyper-transforming approach described in the main text, LDMI can also be trained from scratch using a two-stage process. This follows the standard Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) training pipeline but incorporates our Hyper-Transformer Decoder ( HD ) for INR generation. The training procedure consists of: 1. Stage 1: Learning the Latent Space with I-VAE — We train a Variational Autoencoder for INRs ( I-VAE ) to encode continuous signals into a structured latent space. The encoder learns an approximate posterior qψ (z|X, Y ), while the decoder reconstructs signals from the latent variables. The training objective follows the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) as defined in Equation (11) . To enhance reconstruction quality, additional perceptual or adversarial losses may be applied for certain data types. 2. Stage 2: Training the Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) — Given the structured latent space obtained in Stage 1, we fit a diffusion-based generative model pθ (z) to the aggregate posterior qψ (z). This stage follows the standard DDPM framework, minimizing the objective in Equation (14) . The learned diffusion prior enables generative sampling in the latent space, from which the HD decoder infers INR parameters. The full training procedure is summarized in Algorithm 2 .

# C. Additional Experiments 

C.1. Scalability of LDMI 

A key strength of our approach lies in its parameter efficiency and scalability when compared to alternative methods. As shown in Table 3, while previous approaches such as GASP (Dupont et al., 2022b) or VAMoH (Koyuncu et al., 2023) require substantial hypernetwork parameters (25.7M) to generate relatively small INR weights (50K), LDMI achieves superior performance with only 8.06M hypernetwork parameters while generating 330K INR weights for a 5-layer network.          

> Method HN Params INR Weights Ratio (INR/HN)
> GASP/VAMoH 25.7M 50K 0.0019
> LDMI 8.06M 330K 0.0409

Table 3: Parameter efficiency of hypernetworks (HN) in GASP/VaMoH and LDMI .We confirm this efficiency effect through an ablation study comparing our transformer-based HD decoder against a standard MLP design, as MLPs are commonly used in hypernetwork implementations despite their limitations in modeling complex dependencies. Table 4 shows that on CelebA-HQ, our HD architecture not only achieves superior reconstruction quality (with a 2.79 dB improvement in PSNR) but does so with significantly fewer parameters—less than half compared to the MLP architecture.       

> Method HN Params PSNR (dB)
> LDMI -MLP 17.53M 24.93
> LDMI -HD 8.06M 27.72

Table 4: Ablation study comparing MLP and hyper-transformer HD decoders on CelebA-HQ. This parameter efficiency highlights a crucial advantage of our approach: hyper-transformer’s ability to capture complex inter-dimensional dependencies translates to more effective weight generation with a more compact architecture. The superior scaling properties of LDMI suggest that it can handle larger and more complex INR architectures without prohibitive parameter growth, making it particularly suitable for high-resolution generation tasks that demand larger INRs. 

C.2. Samples at Multiple Resolutions 

To further demonstrate the flexibility of our model, we present additional qualitative results showcasing unconditional samples generated at varying resolutions. As described in the main text, we sample from the latent diffusion prior, decode the latents into INRs using our HD decoder, and evaluate them on coordinate grids of increasing resolution. 15 Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models      

> CelebA-HQ  (256  × 256) CelebA-HQ  (64  × 64) ERA5 3D Chairs
> ×0.125 ×0.25 ×0.5×1×2×4

Figure 8: Additional uncurated samples from LDMI at multiple resolutions. Figure 8 displays generations from LDMI trained on data across different modalities, rendered at scales ranging from ×0.125 

to ×4. These results highlight the resolution-agnostic nature of our approach and its ability to produce coherent, high-quality outputs across a wide range of spatial resolutions. 

C.3. Reconstructions at Multiple Resolutions 

We provide additional reconstruction results to further illustrate LDMI ’s ability to operate seamlessly across a wide range of output resolutions. Each input image is encoded into a latent representation, sampled from the posterior, and decoded into an INR using our HD decoder. The resulting INR is then evaluated over coordinate grids of increasing density to generate reconstructions at progressively higher resolutions. Figures 9 and 10 present reconstructions from LDMI trained on CelebA-HQ at (256 × 256) and (64 × 64) , respectively. Reconstructions are rendered at resolutions ranging from ×0.125 to ×4, showcasing the model’s ability to maintain spatial coherence and fine details even under extreme upsampling. Notably, such flexible reconstruction is not supported by baseline methods like GASP due to architectural limitations. Furthermore, datasets of this complexity are not even addressed by other reconstruction-capable baselines such as VAMoH (Koyuncu et al., 2023), Functa (Dupont et al., 2022b), or Spatial Functa (Bauer et al., 2023). 

# D. Experimental Details 

This section outlines the hyperparameter settings used to train LDMI across datasets. We describe key components, including the encoder, decoder, diffusion model, and dataset settings. Table 5 summarizes the hyperparameters used in our experiments, 16 Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

covering both stages of the generative framework: (i) the first-stage autoencoder—either a VQVAE or β-VAE, depending on the dataset—and (ii) the second-stage latent diffusion model. It lists architectural choices such as latent dimensionality, diffusion steps, attention resolutions, and optimization settings (e.g., batch size, learning rate), along with details of the HD 

decoder, tokenizer, Transformer modules, and INR architecture. For image-based tasks, we use perceptual and adversarial losses to improve sample quality, following Esser et al. (2021). All models were trained on NVIDIA H100 GPUs. 17 Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

> GT ×0.125 ×0.25 ×0.5×1×2×4

Figure 9: Reconstructions of test CelebA-HQ (256 × 256) images by LDMI at multiple resolutions. The ground truth image is first passed through the encoder, which produces the parameters of the posterior distribution. A latent code is then sampled and transformed into the parameters of the INR using our HD decoder. By simply evaluating the INRs at denser coordinate grids, we can generate images at increasingly higher resolutions. 18 Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

> GT ×0.125 ×0.25 ×0.5×1×2×4

Figure 10: Reconstructions of test CelebA-HQ (64 × 64) images by LDMI at multiple resolutions. The ground truth image is first passed through the encoder, which produces the parameters of the posterior distribution. A latent code is then sampled and transformed into the parameters of the INR using our HD decoder. By simply evaluating the INRs at denser coordinate grids, we can generate images at increasingly higher resolutions. 19 Hyper-Transforming Latent Diffusion Models 

CelebA CelebA-HQ 64 × 64 CelebA-HQ 256 × 256 ImageNet ERA5 Chairs resolution 64 × 64 64 × 64 256 × 256 256 × 256 46 × 90 32 × 32 × 32 

modality image image image image polar occupancy first stage model β-VAE β-VAE VQVAE VQVAE β-VAE β-VAE 

Encoder 

codebook size - - 8192 8192 - -latent channels 3 3 3 3 3 64 base channels 64 64 128 128 32 32 ch mult 1,2,4 1,2,4 1,2,4 1,2,4 1,2,4 1,2,4 num blocks 2 2 2 2 2 -dropout - 0.1 - - - 0.2 kl weight 1e-05 1e-04 - - 1.0e-6 1.0e-6 perc weight 1. 1. 1. 1. - -

Discriminator 

layers 2 2 3 3 - -n filters 32 64 64 64 - -dropout - 0.2 - - - -disc weight 0.75 0.75 0.75 0.6 - -

HD decoder Tokenizer 

latent size 16 × 16 16 × 16 64 × 64 64 × 64 11 × 22 4 × 4

patch size 2 2 4 4 1 1heads 4 4 4 4 4 4head dim 32 32 32 32 32 32 

Transformer 

token dim 192 192 384 768 136 128 encoder layers 6 6 5 6 4 3decoder layers 6 6 5 6 4 3heads 6 6 6 12 4 4head dim 48 48 64 64 32 32 feedforward dim 768 768 1536 3072 512 512 groups 64 64 128 128 64 64 dropout - 0.1 0.1 - - 0.2 

INR 

type SIREN SIREN SIREN MLP SIREN layers 5 5 5 5 5 5hidden dim 256 256 256 256 256 256 point enc dim - - - - 256 -

ω 30. 30. 30. 30. - 30. 

Latent Diffusion 

shape z 3 × 16 × 16 3 × 16 × 16 3 × 64 × 64 3 × 64 × 64 3 × 11 × 22 64 × 4 × 4

—z— 768 768 12288 12288 726 1024 diffusion steps 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 noise schedule linear linear linear linear linear linear base channels 64 32 224 192 64 128 ch mult 1,2,3,4 1,2,3,4 1,2,3,4 1,2,3,5 1,2,3,4 1,2 attn resolutions 2, 4, 8 2, 4, 8 8, 16, 32 8, 16, 32 - 4head channels 32 32 32 192 32 64 num blocks 2 2 2 2 2 2class cond - - - crossattn - -context dim - - - 512 - -transformers depth - - - 1 - -

Training 

batch size 64 64 32 32 64 128 iterations 300k, 400k 300k, 200k 1M 1.4M 400k, 500k 300k, 60k lr 1e-06, 2e-06 1e-06, 2e-06 4.5e-6 1.0e-6 1e-06, 2e-06 1e-06, 2e-06 hyper-transforming - - ✓ ✓ - -LDM version - - VQ-F4 (no-attn) VQ-F4 (no-attn) - -

Table 5: Architecture details. 20