Title: On the Tradeoffs of On-Device Generative Models in Federated Predictive Maintenance Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.07860v1

Published Time: Mon, 11 May 2026 01:39:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
> JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 1

# On the Tradeoffs of On-Device Generative Models in Federated Predictive Maintenance Systems 

Usevalad Milasheuski, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Piero Baraldi, Senior Member, IEEE, 

Enrico Zio, Fellow, IEEE, Stefano Savazzi, Senior Member, IEEE 

Abstract —Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a promis-ing paradigm for preserving client data ownership and con-trol over distributed Internet of Things (IoT) environments. While discriminative models dominate most FL use cases, re-cent advances in generative models — such as Variational Autoencoders (VAE), Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN), and Diffusion Models (DM) — offer new opportunities for unsupervised anomaly detection in time series analysis, with relevant applications in predictive maintenance (PdM) in critical industrial infrastructures. In this work, we present a compre-hensive analysis of VAEs, GANs, and DMs in the context of federated PdM. We analyze their performance and communi-cation overhead under both full and partial federation setups, where only subsets of model components are shared. Building on this analysis, the paper proposes a novel taxonomy for federated generative models that formalizes partial component sharing as a principled mechanism for model personalization. Our experiments over a real-world time series dataset reveal distinct trade-offs in model utility, stability, and scalability, especially in heterogeneous and bandwidth-constrained FL settings. For the evaluated GAN-based configurations, full federation improves training stability relative to independent local training, although the model remains less robust than the VAE- and DDPM-based alternatives. For DMs, however, partial federation—especially decoder sharing—can outperform full federation in bandwidth-constrained, non-IID settings. 

Index Terms —Federated Learning, Predictive Maintenance, Variational Autoencoder, Generative Adversarial Networks, Dif-fusion Models, Data Heterogeneity. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# PRedictive maintenance (PdM) has emerged as a corner-stone of the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), playing a key role in the transition toward the next generation of industry (Industry 5.0) [1], [2]. By leveraging data-driven insights to anticipate equipment failures, PdM shifts operations from reactive or preventive maintenance to a proactive, condition-

This article is an extended version of our conference paper, “Federated Generative Models for Predictive Maintenance in Industrial Environments,” published in the Proceedings of the 2024 8th International Conference on System Reliability and Safety (ICSRS) , 2024, pp. 156–161. Usevalad Milasheuski is with Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, IEIIT institute, 20133 Milan, Italy and also with the Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria (DEIB), Politecnico di Milano, 20133 Milan, Italy, (email: usevaladmilasheuski@cnr.it). Piero Baraldi is with the Department of Energy, Politecnico di Milano, 20156 Milan, Italy (email: piero.baraldi@polimi.it). Enrico Zio is with the Department of Energy, Politecnico di Milano, 20156 Milan, Italy and also Mines Paris - PSL, CRC, Sophia Antipolis, France (email: enrico.zio@polimi.it) Stefano Savazzi is with Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, IEIIT institute, 20133 Milan, Italy (email: stefano.savazzi@cnr.it). 

based approach. This paradigm aims to reduce costs and improve safety by preventing catastrophic system failures. The core enabling technology behind these PdM systems is Anomaly Detection (AD). Broadly defined as the identification of patterns that deviate from expected behavior, AD in time series (TS) is increasingly important across domains such as manufacturing [3], cybersecurity [4], and healthcare [5]. By monitoring parameters such as temperature, vibration, and pressure, AD algorithms help PdM systems detect deviations from normal operating conditions, enabling timely interven-tions, reducing downtime, and extending machinery lifespan. The effectiveness of AD depends on models capable of identifying anomalous patterns in large TS streams. Tradi-tional methods, such as statistical tests, autoregressive models, and density-based techniques, often struggle to capture the complex temporal dependencies and multivariate interactions typical of streaming sensor data [6]. Deep Learning (DL) models have therefore been widely adopted for PdM. For example, recurrent neural networks (RNN), long short-term memory (LSTM), and convolutional neural networks (CNN) have been used in various time-series anomaly detection (TSAD) scenarios. Although DL methods improve on classical approaches by learning hierarchical temporal representations, they often fail to capture the full data distribution, especially under non-stationary or evolving conditions. Recently, generative models emerged as powerful tools for unsupervised AD. These models learn sensor data under normal operating conditions and flag deviations through high anomaly score or low likelihood. Compared with discrimi-native models, this approach can better map realistic sensor patterns, augment limited datasets, and provide richer proba-bilistic insights [7]. However, deploying generative AD models in industrial settings must address three main challenges:  

> •

Data ownership and confidentiality . Sensor streams often reveal sensitive operational details, and centralizing raw data from multiple plants may be infeasible because of IP or compliance constraints [8].  

> •

Heterogeneous and non-IID distributions . Different machines or plants often follow different dynamics (e.g., age, operating environment, load, wear), resulting in non-identically and independently distributed (non-IID) data [9]. As a result, a centrally trained model may perform poorly on local data or dilute localized anomalies when aggregating parameters from divergent distributions.  

> •

Resource, bandwidth, and energy constraints . IoT edge devices and local gateways often have limited com-putation, energy, storage, and bandwidth, constraining the  

> arXiv:2605.07860v1 [cs.LG] 8 May 2026 JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 2

Fig. 1: Problem Setup for PdM TSAD. During the training stage, clients train the local model and transmit shared weight 

wsc to the server for multiple rounds. The validation stage individually estimates personalized anomaly threshold ϵc for each client. Finally, during testing , the clients evaluate the performance on the new time series data. transfer of large models or frequent updates [10]. These challenges motivate the integration of genera-tive AD with ownership-preserving data management and communication-efficient training paradigms — most notably, 

Federated Learning (FL) [11], [12]. While FL has been studied widely for classification or regression tasks, its adaptation to generative models - and in particular, for time series AD -remains largely unexplored [13], [14]. This gap highlights the need for a systematic evaluation of generative modeling in federated settings tailored to industrial IoT and PdM scenarios. Such an evaluation should consider not only detection perfor-mance, but also training stability, communication overhead, personalization, and robustness to heterogeneity. 

A. Related works 

The paradigm of AD has shifted from traditional unsuper-vised or self-supervised statistical boundary methods, such as One-class Support Vector Machines (OC-SVM) and Isolation Forest (IF), toward deep generative models [15]. These models learn the probability distribution of normal data Pdata (x) [16], and identify anomalies either as samples in low-density regions of the learned distribution. PdM has attracted considerable attention over the past decade because it is closely linked to TSAD [1], [17]. Its pri-mary goal is to identify deviations from expected operational patterns, enabling early intervention and risk mitigation. By anticipating equipment failures before they occur, PdM shifts maintenance from reactive or preventive schedules to proac-tive, condition-based strategies. Through continuous moni-toring of critical parameters such as temperature, vibration, and pressure [18], PdM systems can detect subtle deviations, reduce downtime, extend machinery lifespan, and lower costs. In this context, AD seeks to model nominal system behavior in order to detect deviations. Generative modeling has emerged as an effective approach because it learns compact represen-tations of input distributions and detects anomalies through reconstruction- or likelihood-based criteria. Among the most widely studied generative models for AD are Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [19], Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [20], and Diffusion Models (DMs) [21]. 

Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [19] learn compressed representations that remain informative enough to reconstruct the input data. Several works have applied VAEs to industrial PdM AD. In [22], the authors replace the standard feed-forward layers of a VAE with LSTM units to capture temporal dependencies and sequential patterns in sensor data. The model in [23] enhances the standard sequential VAE by adding a smoothness-inducing term to the loss, encouraging smooth latent transitions. In contrast, [24] uses a standard VAE to compress short data windows into low-dimensional embed-dings, and then trains an LSTM on these latent representations to predict future embeddings. 

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [20] originally gained popularity in image generation. In the context of time-series AD, works such as [25]–[27] show promising JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 3

adaptations of GANs to this problem. For example, MAD-GAN [26] is a straightforward GAN-based approach to AD, detecting anomalies through a combined score of reconstruc-tion error and discrimination loss. Similarly, TAnoGAN [25] uses LSTMs to capture temporal dependencies and combines a loss on hidden representations with the discriminator score for anomaly detection. During inference, for each test sequence, it runs an iterative optimization loop to find the latent vector that best reconstructs the sequence. Inspired by CycleGAN [28], TadGAN [27] adopts a cycle-consistent architecture with two generators and two discriminators, ensuring that data can be mapped to the latent space and back, and yielding a more stable reconstruction error for anomaly scoring. 

Diffusion Models (DMs) [21] have emerged as an alternative to GANs for image generation, in some cases outperforming them [29]. For AD, AnoDDPM [30] departs from full denois-ing by introducing only partial corruption (e.g., 50% ) and then reconstructing the original sample, thereby removing anoma-lies if present. The algorithm detects anomalies by comparing the reconstruction with the original input. TimeADDM [31] employs a multi-step reconstruction strategy, corrupting data to different noise levels and attempting reconstruction from each of them. Anomalies are flagged when the model fails to recover the original signal from intermediate noise steps. While generative models offer strong AD capabilities, they require large and diverse datasets that are rarely available at a single source. To address this limitation, Federated Learning (FL) [11] offers a way to scale and accelerate PdM deployment across diverse critical equipment. By relying on model sharing 

rather than data sharing , FL lowers the administrative and legal burdens associated with information exchange. This is particularly important in industrial settings, where direct data exchange may be restricted by privacy regulations such as GDPR [8]. By aggregating local model updates, FL enables the global system to benefit from distributed datasets while preserving data ownership and reducing competitive risks. Several studies have explored FL for generative models [32]–[34]. However, it introduces substantial communication and computational overhead, especially for deep generative architectures with millions of parameters. This issue is par-ticularly relevant in IoT-driven PdM, where edge devices are highly resource-constrained. To mitigate it, partial federation 

has been proposed, in which only a subset of parameters is shared and jointly updated. Existing FL methods based on this idea have shown improved personalization [35], [36], greater robustness [37], [38], and lower communication overhead [14]. Despite these advances, FL of generative models in het-erogeneous industrial IoT and PdM settings remains underex-plored [13], [33], [39], [40]. Recent federated TSAD studies have begun to address related challenges through stronger AD pipelines. For example, FedSW-TSAD stabilizes adver-sarial training via Sobolev–Wasserstein constraints [13], while PrivTSAD-FedWGAN adopts a federated WGAN-GP frame-work with a composite anomaly score for privacy-preserving multivariate TSAD [40]. Similarly, [39] proposes a federated hypernetwork with client-specific transformer reconstruction models for distributed multivariate TSAD under heterogeneous settings. Beyond direct AD methods, recent federated genera-tive tools such as FedTDD address misalignment through data distillation and synthetic-output exchange [41]. Although not an AD method, it remains relevant as a federated diffusion approach for heterogeneous TS data. Given the inherent chal-lenges of training generative models, distributed learning over heterogeneous datasets can significantly degrade performance and hinder learning of the underlying data distribution [9]. This work aims to bridge this gap by systematically investigating federated model-partitioning strategies for generative AD in industrial IoT settings, substantially extending our preliminary VAE-based conference study [14]. A related but broader research direction concerns the fed-erated training of Time-Series Foundation Models (TSFMs). Recent works such as FFTS and FeDaL study federated pre-training and cross-dataset generalization for general-purpose TS representations, with AD treated as one downstream task among several others [42], [43]. These developments are important to acknowledge, but they address a different setting from the one considered here: our focus is on on-device predictive maintenance with unsupervised AD from normal-condition data, client-specific threshold calibration, and ex-plicit communication-efficiency trade-offs. The general system model, illustrated in Fig. 1, consists of distributed industrial clients that train local generative models on private sensor data and exchange model parameters with a server. The paper proposes a systematic partial-federation framework for private training of generative AD models in FL setups. Beyond performance evaluation, it aims to establish a taxonomy of generative methods for AD and to formulate guidelines for architecture selection for PdM in resource-constrained industrial IoT networks. We also investigate the performance and robustness of generative models under partial-federation policies designed to reduce communication overhead and mitigate instability, such as mode collapse, when aggregating heterogeneous generative models. Finally, we evaluate the framework for degradation-state assessment on multi-sensor systems operating in evolving environments. A preliminary study [14] by the same authors introduced partial federation for PdM, comparing full, encoder-only, and decoder-only sharing against centralized and no-cooperation baselines. The present paper extends that contribution in scope, methodology, and evaluation. In particular, it moves from a single-model VAE study to a comparative analysis of VAE-, GAN-, and DDPM-based approaches, and reformulates partial federation through a unified analysis-versus-synthesis 

perspective common to all model families and explicit com-munication overhead analysis. Accordingly, the paper analyzes how parameter-sharing policies affect unsupervised AD, per-sonalization, and communication cost in federated PdM, rather than providing an exhaustive benchmark of optimizer-level personalized FL algorithms. Instead we study how partitioning 

generative model into shared and private modules affects TSAD, personalization, stability, and communication cost. In this sense, the paper is structurally related to split-parameter personalized FL methods such as FedPer and FedRep, but differs in scope: rather than benchmarking optimizer-level personalization schemes, it develops and evaluates a taxonomy for unsupervised generative TSAD in federated PdM. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 4

B. Contributions 

The work explores the potential of FL and generative models to enable asset-level decentralized training of efficient AD tools for PdM. This paper studies a focused and practically relevant design question: how three representative families of unsupervised generative models for time-series anomaly detection (TSAD) behave in heterogeneous federated settings, and how partial sharing of their architectural components affects robustness, personalization, and communication effi-ciency. Rather than adopting a purely optimization-based view, we study FL through the lens of model partitioning: which parts of a generative architecture should be shared globally and which should remain client-specific under heterogeneous industrial conditions. In this sense, the proposed framework is structurally close to shared/private personalized FL based on model splitting, since only a subset of parameters is communicated and aggregated while the rest is retained locally [35], [44]. However, these algorithms are mainly tailored to supervised tasks such as classification, where the separation between representation learning and classifier components is straightforward. In unsupervised generative modeling, this sep-aration is less clear because the task generally relies on input reconstruction. The work also aims to establish a taxonomy of generative methods for AD and to formulate common policies for selecting the most suitable architecture in the context of PdM within resource-constrained industrial IoT networks. We specifically investigate the performance and robustness of generative models under several partial federation policies designed to reduce communication overhead and mitigate instability—such as mode collapse—often observed when ag-gregating heterogeneous generative models. We evaluate this framework for degradation-state assessment on multi-sensor systems operating in evolving environments. The main contributions of this paper are as follows: 1) We provide a structured review and problem framing of generative models for TSAD in privacy-preserving collaborative industrial settings, highlighting the current gap between recent advances in VAE-, GAN-, and DDPM-based anomaly detection and their still limited study under federated PdM setups. 2) We introduce a unified architectural perspective for federated generative TSAD, in which VAE-, GAN-, and DDPM-based models are interpreted through a common analysis/synthesis decomposition. This provides a con-sistent way to define and compare full federation, partial federation, and fully local training across heterogeneous generative model families. 3) We develop a systematic partial-federation framework for unsupervised generative models under a common FL pipeline, so that the effect of shared/private architectural partitioning can be analyzed independently of optimizer-specific personalization mechanisms. This makes it pos-sible to isolate how parameter-sharing policies influence anomaly-detection performance, personalization, stabil-ity, and robustness under heterogeneous federated PdM conditions. 4) We provide an extensive empirical study that substan-tially extends our preliminary ICSRS 2024 conference paper. In particular, we move from a single-model VAE analysis to a comparative study of VAE-, GAN-, and DDPM-based approaches. We enrich the evaluation us-ing different micro- and macro-level criteria, including timing-aware PdM metrics to better separate the charac-teristics of each of the federation scenarios. 5) We complement detection-performance results with a deployment-oriented analysis of federated PdM. Specif-ically, we quantify communication overhead in terms of transmitted parameters, exchanged traffic, and latency. Based on this joint analysis, the paper derives practical guidelines on when partial federation is preferable to full sharing or fully local training in resource-constrained industrial IoT environments. The paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the generative models for AD, namely, the VAE, the GAN and DM-based approaches. In Section III, we discuss the FL principles and their adaptation to personalization using partial federation. Section IV provides the details of the problem setup and evaluation metrics. Section V provides the discussion of the experiment, including the dataset and models. Section VI discusses the results of the simulations. Finally, Section VII provides the conclusions of this work and future directions. II. O VERVIEW OF GENERATIVE MODELING 

In this section, we detail the three popular generative models suitable for deployment on edge IoT devices. As previously introduced, the core premise of unsupervised AD is learning the probability distribution of sensor time-series data collected during normal operating conditions. During the training stages, the model learns to reconstruct or generate samples within the manifold of normal behavior. During inference, signifi-cant reconstruction errors or low likelihood scores indicate anomalies [16]. While discriminative models learn a decision boundary between normal (i.e., y = 0 ) and abnormal (i.e., 

y = 1 ) classes by modeling P (y | x), generative models learn the underlying data distribution P (x). In the context of AD where anomalous labels are scarce or non-existent, generative approaches are superior as they function in a purely unsupervised manner. They define normal behavior by what the model can generate, treating any deviation from this learned distribution as anomalous. 

A. Variational Autoencoders 

Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [19] are latent–variable generative models trained by maximizing a lower bound on the data log-likelihood. While using a similar idea to their Autoen-coders (AEs) predecessors [45], it learns a continuous, well-structured latent distribution that enables principled generative sampling and improved generalization. The encoder qϕ(z | x)

parametrized by ϕ approximates the intractable posterior over latent variables z, while the decoder pθ (x | z) parametrized by θ reconstructs data x from samples z drawn in the latent space. The encoder/decoder approach encourages the model to learn a meaningful structure within this latent space, which would be sufficient to approximate the input. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 5

Fig. 2: A comparative overview of major generative model architectures: GANs, VAEs, and Diffusion Models. Training a VAE revolves around maximizing the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO), which captures the trade-off between two complementary forces, namely the reconstruction error and the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence. The reconstruction term encourages the decoder to accurately reproduce the input data, while the KL divergence term gently regularizes the encoder’s distribution toward a simple prior, which is usually set to p(z) = N (0 , I ):

LELBO = Ez∼qϕ(z|x)

 log pθ (x | z) − KL  qϕ(z | x) ∥ p(z).

(1) A crucial element enabling this optimization is the repa-rameterization trick. Instead of sampling z directly from the encoder’s distribution, the model expresses each latent sample as a deterministic transformation of noise, which is called 

reparameterization trick :

z = μϕ(x) + σϕ(x) ⊙ ϵ, ϵ ∼ N (0, I). (2) This reformulation allows gradients to pass cleanly through the sampling step, making end-to-end learning possible. 

B. Generative Adversarial Networks 

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [20] train a gen-erator Gθ (z) and discriminator Dϕ(x) in a minimax setup where the discriminator Dϕ distinguishes real samples from generated ones and the generator Gθ produces synthetic data in an attempt to fool the discriminator Dϕ. The standard objective can be formulated in the following way 

min 

> Gθ

max 

> Dϕ

Ex∼p(x)

 log Dϕ(x)+Ez∼p(z)

 log  1−Dϕ(Gθ (z))  .

(3) Although effective, this formulation presents well-known challenges [46]. In practice, adversarial min–max optimization is often unstable and requires careful balancing between the generator and discriminator during training. Problems such as vanishing gradients, sensitivity to hyperparameters, and oscillatory convergence are common, especially on complex or heterogeneous data distributions [47]. Much of the progress in GAN research has therefore focused on stabilizing these dynamics. A key step in this direction is the Wasserstein GAN 

[48], which replaces the Jensen–Shannon divergence of the original GAN with the Wasserstein-1 distance. This change turns the discriminator into a critic fϕ, removes the sigmoid, and allows real-valued outputs: 

max  

> f

Ex[fϕ(x)] − Ez[fϕ(Gθ (z))] . (4) The generator then minimizes the same expression. This redefinition yields smoother gradients and training behavior but introduces a new requirement: the critic must satisfy a 1-Lipschitz constraint. The improved WGAN-GP [49] intro-duces a soft constraint for Eq. 4 by penalizing deviations of the gradient norm from 1 on points interpolated between real and generated samples: 

λ E˜x (∥∇ ˜xfϕ(˜ x)∥2 − 1) 2 , (5) where ˜x is defined as a random interpolation between a real data sample x and a generated sample ˆx. This gradient penalty ensures the critic satisfies the 1-Lipschitz continuity constraint along the straight lines connecting real and generated data, resulting in smoother gradients and a more stable training. 

C. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models 

Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) [21] take a fundamentally different approach to generative mod-eling by learning to reverse a gradual corruption of data. Instead of mapping noise to data in a single step, they construct generation as a careful walk backward through a noising process. At training time, a clean data sample x0 is progressively corrupted through a fixed Markov chain: 

q(xt | xt−1) = N

p 1 − βt xt−1, β tI



, (6) where {βt}Tt=1 is a variance schedule. The closed-form ex-pression for q(xt | x0) allows sampling noisy versions of x0

at arbitrary timestep t.A model is trained to predict the noise added at each step. The most common architecture used for this purpose is U-net [50], which consists of an encoder–decoder structure with skip connections that preserve multi-scale information across JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 6

resolutions. This design enables effective modeling of both local and global temporal dependencies in time-series data, making it well-suited for the iterative denoising process central to DDPMs. We define this model as ϵw(xt, t ) parametrized by 

w, where w = {ϕ, θ} represent the parameters of the encoder and decoder parts of the U-net model, respectively. The variational bound leads to a simplified denoising objective: 

LDDPM = Et, x0, ϵ 

h

∥ϵ − ϵw(xt, t )∥22

i

, (7) where xt is produced via the forward noising process xt =√¯αt x0 + √1 − ¯αt ϵ and ¯αt = Qts=1 (1 − βs).Sampling proceeds by iteratively denoising from xT ∼N (0, I) back to x0 using learned mean predictions: 

pw(xt−1 | xt) = N  μw(xt, t ), σ 2 

> t

I , (8) yielding high-quality generative samples. When it comes to AD, these models generally rely on thresholding over a particular score function. Generally, this function is a loss function, such as Mean Squared Error (MSE) or Mean Absolute Error (MAE) between the original input x

and its reconstructed version of the input ˆx, like for VAE in [22] and DDPM in [30]. However, comparison of the activations of the intermediate representations between the real and generated inputs, h(x) and h(ˆ x), may provide a more meaningful anomaly signal, as in [25]. 

D. Unified architectural perspective 

VAE-, GAN-, and DDPM-based models can be decomposed into two fundamental functional components: (i) an analysis 

component, which maps high-dimensional TS observations into latent, intermediate, or scored representations, and (ii) a synthesis (or generation) component, which reconstructs or generates data samples from such representations. In VAEs, this decomposition naturally corresponds to the encoder–decoder pair. In GANs, the discriminator (or critic) fulfills the analysis role by extracting informative features from data samples and outputting a signal on whether a given sam-ple comes from the true data distribution, while the generator acts as the synthesis module by mapping latent noise to the data space. Similarly, in DDPMs, the U-Net backbone can be interpreted as a structured encoder–decoder architecture, where the down-sampling path encodes noisy observations into hierarchical representations and the up-sampling path performs the denoising and reconstruction process. This unified perspective allows all models to be described using a common parameter partition {ϕ, θ}, independently of their specific architectural choices. As clarified in the follow-ing section, this perspective forms the basis for the federation strategies across heterogeneous architectures. In other words, the proposed partial federation strategies can be formulated by selectively sharing either the analysis component ( ϕ), the synthesis component ( θ), or both, while keeping the remaining parameters local. III. F EDERATED SYSTEM FOR GENERATIVE MODEL 

TRAINING 

To address the challenges of data privacy, regulatory compli-ance (e.g., GDPR), and bandwidth constraints in industrial IoT, we leverage FL. This section outlines the standard FL formu-lation and introduces the partial federation paradigm, which is aimed at enhancing personalization and training stability in generative models while reducing communication overhead. Building on this framework, we discuss how partial federation 

can be systematically applied to the VAEs, GANs, and DDPMs generative architectures illustrated before, highlighting model-specific federation strategies and shared component designs. 

A. Federated Learning and Data Heterogeneity 

FL enables the collaborative training of a global model across multiple decentralized edge devices (clients) without exchanging raw local data. Consider a set of C industrial sites (clients), where each client c possesses a private local dataset 

Dc of time-series sensor readings. The goal is to minimize a global objective function L(w) over the model parameters w:

min  

> w

L(w) = 

> C

X

> c=1

|D c||D| Lc(w), (9) where |D| = P 

> c

|D c| is the total data volume, and Lc(w) = 

Ex∼D c [L(x, w)] is the local empirical risk on client c.In the standard FedAvg [11] algorithm, the server initializes a global model w(0) . At each communication round r:1) The server broadcasts the current global parameters 

w(r) to a subset of eligible clients F (r).2) Each client c updates the model locally using Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) on its private data Dc, produc-ing an updated local model wc(r + 1) .3) The server aggregates these local updates to produce the next global model w(r + 1) .While effective for standard supervised tasks, FedAvg faces significant hurdles in generative AD for IoT:  

> •

non-IID heterogeneous data : Industrial assets often op-erate under distinct environmental conditions or load pro-files (heterogeneity). Averaging generative models (like VAEs or GANs) trained on divergent distributions often leads to ”mode averaging,” where the global model fails to capture the sharp, specific distributions required for accurate reconstruction.  

> •

Communication Overhead : Deep generative models (e.g., Diffusion Models) may contain millions of pa-rameters. Transmitting full gradients or weight updates frequently over bandwidth-constrained IoT networks is often infeasible. 

B. Partial Federation Paradigm 

To mitigate the limitations of full federation, we adopt a 

partial federation strategy. In this setup, the model parameters 

w are partitioned into two disjoint sets: shared parameters 

wshare , which are communicated between each client and the server, and private parameters wpriv c , which remain local throughout the federation process. Thus, we define the global model w(r) = {w(r)}, while the local model is defined as 

wc(r) = w(r) ∪ wpriv c (r). In the classic FedAvg case, our algorithm reduces to wshare = {w} and wpriv c (r) = {∅} . In contrast, wshare = {∅} and wpriv c (r) = {w} correspond to JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 7

independent local training without communication. Whenever both, wpriv c (r)̸ = {∅} and wshare c (r)̸ = {∅} , the approach can be interpreted as adaptation of personalized FL algorithms, such as FedPer [35] or FedRep [44] for unsupervised AD. More details on the training procedure are provided in Algorithm 1. This modular approach allows operators to balance global knowledge discovery, local anomaly sensitivity, and personalization [14]. Within this formulation, the paper deliberately focuses on the effect of model partitioning itself. In the preceding section, we categorized the three main generative frameworks: VAEs, GANs, and DDPMs. These architectures allow for a strategic partitioning of components based on their functional roles. In VAEs, the encoder ( ϕ)performs amortized inference by compressing input data into a low-dimensional latent space, while the decoder ( θ) re-constructs the original data manifold. Similarly, in the GAN framework, the discriminator (or critic, ϕ) acts as a feature extractor that maps data to an informative scalar signal (the probability of being real), while the generator ( θ) acts as the generative counterpart, transforming noise into synthetic sam-ples. In DDPMs, the U-Net backbone [50] is structurally split: the encoder portion ( ϕ) progressively downsamples the input to capture high-level hierarchical features, whereas the decoder (θ) upsamples these features to reconstruct the denoised output (Fig. 2). By unifying these components under the notations ϕ

and θ, we highlight a fundamental duality: ϕ (which we refer to as the encoder ) parameters are associated with the analysis of data (mapping from high-dimensional input to compressed representations or scores), whereas θ (which we refer to as the 

decoder ) parameters are dedicated to data synthesis (mapping from latent or noisy representations back to the data space). his gives flexibility in defining wshare and wpriv by selecting whether to share/store ϕ, θ or {ϕ, θ}. In this sense, the proposed formulation is related to split-parameter personalized FL methods such as FedPer [35] and FedRep [44], which also distinguish shared and client-specific parameters. However, those methods target supervised models, where splitting a shared representation from a local prediction head is natural. Here, we consider unsupervised generative TSAD, where the relevant partition instead lies between analysis and synthesis modules that jointly affect reconstruction quality, anomaly sensitivity, and training stability. Rather than benchmarking optimizer-level personalization schemes, we focus on the ar-chitectural question of which generative components should be shared or kept local under heterogeneous industrial conditions. When the analysis module is shared, clients are encouraged to map local observations into a more aligned latent repre-sentation while retaining client-specific reconstruction through private synthesis modules. Conversely, when the synthesis module is shared, clients preserve local feature extraction but reconstruct through a common generative pathway. Under heterogeneous industrial conditions, these two choices encode different trade-offs between global alignment and local spe-cialization. This rationale motivates the empirical comparison developed in the rest of the paper. 

Algorithm 1 Partial Federation with generative models  

> 1:

Input: Global parameters w(0) = {wshare (0) }, number of clients C, private parameters wpriv c (0) , number of communication rounds R 

> 2:

for each round r = 1 , 2, . . . , R do  

> 3:

Server selects a subset F (r) of C clients  

> 4:

for each client c ∈ Fr in parallel do  

> 5:

Client c receives w(r) from the server  

> 6:

wc(r) ← { w(r) ∪ wpriv c (r)} 

> 7:

for each local epoch i from 1 to E do  

> 8:

for each batch b of data from Dc do  

> 9:

wc(r) ← wc(r) − η∇ℓ(wc(r); b) 

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

Client c sends wshare c (r) of wc(r) to the server  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

Server aggregates the updates:  

> 15:

w(r + 1) ← P  

> c∈Fr
> |Dc||Dr|

wshare c (r), where |Dc| is the number of data points on client c and |Dr | = P 

> c∈Fr

|Dc| 

> 16:

end for 

IV. D ISTRIBUTED ANOMALY DETECTION AND MODELS 

SETUP 

In this section, we discuss the problem and the distributed AD system and the deployed models. We briefly explain how these models detect the anomaly and discuss the performance metrics used for our experiments. 

A. Distributed Anomaly Detection 

For our problem, we consider a set of C clients, each equipped with a health monitoring system of K sensors. The sensor measurements obtained from different clients c

share different factors, such as geolocation and operating conditions. The operating machine is designed to operate for 

T arbitrary time units (atu) unless a random failure occurs. Each measurement sensor operates at a fixed frequency fs = 1 

atu −1. We assume each of the C clients has a stored history of the equipment runs of |Dc| samples, which they are willing to use to train the AD model, but not willing to transmit over the medium. Each client’s equipment is subjected to a degradation process denoted as Dc = {Dc}t≥0, which is influenced by the seasonal effects of the environment. This process can lead the equipment to an abnormal state at time τc,i when degradation exceeds a certain threshold df , which may later result in its failure, which we denote as T fc,i . This process is different for each client c, thus being the main source of heterogeneity among the individual datasets. Based on the proposed notation, for each sample, we can define the time of life as 

T lif e c,i = min (T, T fc,i ). (10) We denote a particular sample’s sensor measurements j of a client c time t as: 

xc,i (t) = [ xc,i, 1(t), x c,i, 2(t), ..., x c,i,K (t)] T . (11) JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 8

The normal/abnormal state of each sensor recording is indi-cated by a set of binary labels {yc,i (t)}T lif e c,i  

> t=0

to register the change point, i.e., 

yc,i (t) = 

(

1 if t ≥ τc,i 

0 otherwise . (12) Based on (11) and (12), we can define the dataset Dc for a client c:

Dc = {(Xc,i , Yc,i )}|Dc| 

> i=1

, (13) with 

Xc,i = [ xc,i (0) , ..., xc,i (T lif e c,i )] (14) 

Yc,i = [ yc,i (0) , ..., y c,i (T lif e c,i )] (15) The goal is to collaboratively train either global or per-sonalized generative models for each of the clients, which could accurately estimate the anomaly time ˆτc.i for the new measurements. The desired model should not only be able to identify the presence of an anomaly, but also estimate the anomaly time as close as possible to the real anomaly time 

τc.i to both maximize the operating time and avoid repair costs once the system enters the anomalous state. 

B. Generative models 

For VAE, GAN and DDPM in this work, we use approaches and models similar to [22], [25], [30] and [13] (see Sect. II). The VAE model is constructed of multiple LSTM layers, which we call LSTM-VAE , as defined in [22] and [33]. For GAN, we adopt a TAnoGAN-like architecture [25] and replace the original adversarial objective with the Wasserstein formulation in (4), together with gradient penalty, to improve training stability [32], [40]. In addition, we also include 

FedSW-TSAD , that jointly uses a generative reconstruction component, a discriminator, and a forecasting component, trains using, Sobolev–Wasserstein stabilization. In the fed-erated experiments, the predictor is communicated only in the Full federation setup. For the partial federation variants, we follow the same encoder/decoder comparison used for the other models, while the predictor remains local. For DM we use DDPM algorithm, using the Gaussian noise for sample corruption and the model is similar to the classic U-net [50], but with the replacement of 2D convolutions with 1D convolutions, inspired by the U-time [51] architecture and [30] approach. We call these two approaches TAnoWGAN and 

TAnoDDPM to differentiate from the original implementa-tions. 

C. Anomaly Detection 

Conventionally, the decision on anomaly time detection re-lies on a pre-defined anomaly score based on the reconstructed input. For example, for autoencoder- and diffusion-based mod-els usually apply thresholding over the MSE between the input and its reconstruction: 

SV AE,T AnoDDP M Anom (x) = ∥x − ˆx∥22, (16) 

ST AnoW GAN Anom (x) = (1 − γ)∥x − ˆx∥ + γ∥h(x) − h(fϕ(z)) ∥,

(17) 

SFedSW -TSAD Anom (x) = α|x − ˆx∥22 + β|Dϕ(x) − Dϕ(ˆ x)|

+ γ∥xtar − P (xcond )∥22 , (18) where P (·) the predictor, xcond the conditioning input window used for forecasting, and xtar the corresponding target future window (see [13] for details). By learning this score for the expected operating conditions, we can select a threshold ϵc that triggers detection when the score exceeds it. We use a client index c to highlight that those thresholds are learned independently during the validation phase (Fig. 1), which introduces another level of personalization to adapt for local heterogeneity in the data. To select the best threshold, we used Bayesian optimization [52], minimizing the average time between the true and predicted anomalies. This threshold search is executed only once in the post-training validation stage and optimizes a one-dimensional, client-specific threshold. Accordingly, Bayesian optimization is used here as an offline calibration step, rather than as part of the federated training loop or the AD pipeline. 

D. Performance Metric for Change-point Detection 

Most studies assess anomaly-detection performance using standard metrics such as precision , recall and F1 score. While these provide a general overview, they often fail to capture the full picture in certain setups. limitation of the F1 score is that it treats each timestamp as an independent and symmetric classification decision. In our setting, however, the problem is sequential, highly imbalanced, and dominated by a single persistent event. Traditional metrics are better suited to spike-anomaly scenarios, in which multiple anomalies may occur during operation and the system does not remain in a faulty state after an anomaly. In our PdM environment, once the system enters an anomalous state, it remains in that state until the end of the simulation or until a random failure occurs. Therefore, metrics such as F1 ,

precision and recall provide only a high-level indication of whether the model detects the anomaly during the simulation, rather than describing how close the predicted anomaly time is to the true one. For completeness, we also report the area under the precision–recall curve (PR-AUC) as a threshold-independent metric commonly used in imbalanced anomaly-detection problems. In our setting, PR-AUC provides a com-plementary view of how well the anomaly score separates normal from anomalous samples before threshold calibration. However, since PdM decisions depend not only on whether an anomaly is detected but also on when it is detected, as discussed previously, PR-AUC alone is not sufficient to assess deployment quality. One option to provide a better general performance of the model is to define a cost for the model being either too sensitive or too conservative. We adopt the loss from [53] with the same parameters. The advantage of this loss is asymmetry by design, allowing to set higher costs for the late detection and lower costs for false positives, simulating the real PdM environments. The general purpose of the PdM can be described twofold. On one hand, the desired system is expected to operate as long as possible before the expected anomaly or system failure. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 9  

> (a) Expected operating conditions (b) Anomalous operating conditions after τ

Fig. 3: Examples of the Aramis dataset for the selected use-case: a) - sensors operating under normal conditions throughout the simulation time T , b) - an example of an anomaly occurring after τ = 944 atu (red vertical line). Thus, a model that would predict the anomaly too soon from the true value will significantly reduce the runtime of the system and increase the cost. Thus, we define the average offset time between the early predicted anomalies and the true anomaly time as: 

∆tF P = 1

Ntest Ntest X

> i=1

∆tiF P (19) 

∆tiF P =



τ i − τ ipred if τ ipred ≤ τ i

T lif e i − τ ipred if τ i = ∅

0 otherwise (20) On the other hand, a conservative system may either predict the anomaly after the system has entered an anomalous state. Given the high cost of repairs, this behavior is even more undesirable than the high sensitivity. We introduce the aver-age offset time between the anomaly and the late predicted anomalies 

∆tF N = 1

Ntest Ntest X

> i=1

∆tiF N (21) 

∆tiF N =



τ ipred − τ i if τ ipred ≥ τ i

T lif e i − τ i if τ i = ∅

0 otherwise 

. (22) By analyzing these two metrics, we can get a better un-derstanding of the model behavior, which is more descriptive than the general metrics discussed previously. These metrics provide better guidelines for model selection based on the application, whether the early detection is more desirable than the late detection or the opposite. V. C ASE STUDIES AND EXPERIMENTAL DATASETS 

To validate the proposed federated generative frameworks, we use the ARAMIS dataset [53] as the primary benchmark and the SWaT dataset [54] as complementary cross-domain validation. ARAMIS remains the main reference for the PdM setting considered in this work, since it matches the persistent-anomaly formulation introduced in Section IV, while SWaT is used to assess whether the main trends under partial federation extend to a second industrial TSAD benchmark. For complete-ness, when we later report complementary results on the SWaT dataset, we restrict the evaluation to Precision , Recall , F1 , and 

PR-AUC , as they are sufficient for non-persistent anomalies in TS, while the timing-aware metrics introduced above are specific to the persistent-anomaly PdM formulation considered for ARAMIS. 

A. ARAMIS Dataset and Problem Formulation 

In the proposed setup, we consider a cross-silo scenario with a small number of reliable institutional clients. Specif-ically, we set C = 5 by partitioning the components of the ARAMIS dataset [53] in a heterogeneous manner according to system identifier and environmental degradation process. Each client receives one partition designed to reflect environmental heterogeneity. This partition is then split into |Dc| = 30 

normal samples for training, |Dval c | = 65 samples for ϵc

threshold selection and |Dtest c | = 65 samples for testing. Each component is monitored by K = 10 sensors. The systems are designed to operate for T = 1000 arbitrary time units (atu(s)), although some fail before T . Each TS was then divided into partially overlapping windows of size 20 with a stride 5.We simulate R = 30 rounds or until convergence, with 

E = 4 local training epochs. We use the Adam [55] optimizer with a learning rate 10 −4 and a batch size of 64. Post-training, a validation phase is conducted where clients locally determine the optimal personalized anomaly threshold JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 10 

ϵc based on their own validation datasets from the same distri-bution as the test sets. We employ Bayesian Optimization [52] (50 iterations) to minimize the average time offset between the correct AD time and the prediction. 

B. SWaT Dataset and Federated Partitioning 

To complement the ARAMIS case study with a second industrial benchmark, we evaluate the proposed framework on the Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) dataset [54]. SWaT is a multivariate industrial control system dataset collected from a scaled water-treatment testbed and is widely used for TSAD in cyber-physical systems. Although SWaT is not a PdM with the single persistent changepoint structure as ARAMIS, many attacks affect contiguous temporal intervals rather than isolated point anomalies, making it a meaningful complementary benchmark for the AD setting in this work. Among the candidate benchmarks, SWaT was selected be-cause it is the closest to the anomaly-detection protocol studied here: it supports unsupervised multivariate TSAD, contains temporally extended anomalous intervals, and allows client-wise validation and threshold selection under a federated par-tition. By contrast, C-MAPSS/N-CMAPSS [56], [57] primarily target prognostics and remaining-useful-life estimation, while SMAP/MSL [58] are relevant AD benchmarks but are less representative of the industrial PdM scenario emphasized in this paper. To emulate the same cross-silo federation setting, we set 

C = 5 clients and partition the SWaT sequence chronologi-cally. The normal-operation portion of the dataset is split into five equal contiguous intervals, and one interval is assigned to each client for local training. The subsequent portion contain-ing anomalous behavior is also split into five equal contiguous intervals aligned with the same clients. Each client-specific interval is then divided into validation and test subsets used for local threshold calibration and final evaluation, respectively. This partition preserves temporal locality within each client and avoids mixing future observations across the training and evaluation stages. For consistency with the ARAMIS experiments, we retain the same window size, stride, federated protocol, and client-wise threshold selection procedure. However, since SWaT is not evaluated as a PdM changepoint detection task in the same operational sense as ARAMIS, the timing-aware metrics introduced in Section IV are not directly comparable. Therefore, for SWaT we report precision , recall , F1 , and PR-AUC , and use these results as complementary cross-domain validation of the proposed partial-federation strategies. 

C. Generative Models Configurations 

The same model configurations are used across both ARAMIS and SWaT in order to isolate the effect of the federation strategy and dataset characteristics from that of architecture-specific hyperparameter changes. In our experi-ments, we used the following model architectures: 

1) LSTM-VAE: Following [33], for our experiment, we composed the encoder of two LSTM layers of size 256 and 128 with two linear layers of size 5 to represent the mean and standard deviation of the latent space, and the decoder with two LSTM layers of size 128 and 256, respectively. Both modules use ReLU as the activation function. 

2) TAnoWGAN: We stabilize original [25] for FL setup [32], following [40]. The generator and the critic parts follow the same LSTM-based structure as the VAE, with the latent dimension set to 20. We set the gradient penalty λ to 10. For AD, we apply 1500 Adam steps with learning rate 10 −2 to minimize (17) with respect to z. We set γ for the loss to 0.1. 

3) FedSW-TSAD: We implement the baseline following the original formulation [13] for all the parts of the system. We set the hidden dimension of the predictor to 128 for both LSTM layers, and use a two-layer predictor with dropout 0.1. The generator is implemented as a TCN with hidden dimensions [64 , 128 , 128] , kernel size 3, and dilations [1 , 2, 4] ,while the discriminator uses hidden dimensions [128 , 128] . We use dropout 0.1 in both the generator and discriminator, λ to 10. For anomaly scoring, we set the contribution of each terms as 0.35, 0.15, and 0.5. In order to enable fair comparison, we excluded differential privacy (DP) mechanism from the algorithm, leaving the analysis of the impact on DP for the future work over all the models. 

4) TAnoDDPM: As mentioned previously, we follow the architecture proposed in [51]. The encoder consists of three residual blocks (two 1D convolutions with kernel size 3, each followed by normalization and a non-linearity), followed by a down-sampling convolution (kernel size 4). The blocks use 32, 64, and 128 filters. The decoder mirrors this structure: each level applies a transposed 1D convolution for up-sampling, concatenates the result with the corresponding encoder skip connection, and processes the fused features with two residual blocks. The diffusion time embedding size is set to 32. During training, we set T = 1000 with β0 = 10 −4 and βT = 2 · 10 −2.For anomaly score, we noise a sample to a timestep 250 before denoising. VI. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND BENCHMARKS 

In what follows, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the experimental results. We evaluate the trade-offs between model utility, communication efficiency, and stability across five main scenarios discussed below:  

> •

Centralized Learning . Corresponds to a case baseline where we have a single node with all the available training data.  

> •

Independent Training . In this case, we assume the clients are independent and do not engage in the fed-eration. The performance is the average over the local metrics.  

> •

Full Federation . A conventional federated learning setup, where we apply Algorithm 1 to the entire model param-eters.  

> •

Encoder/Discriminator Federation . In this case, to halve the communication overhead, the clients communi-cate only the parameters ϕ corresponding to the analysis part , which is an Encoder for VAE and DDPM (of the U-Net model) or a Discriminator for GAN.  

> •

Decoder/Generator Federation . Similarly to the previ-ous case, the clients communicate only the synthesis part JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 11 

of the model parameters θ, which is either a Decoder for VAE and DDPM (of the U-Net model) or a Generator for GAN, to half the communication overhead. 

A. Results 

Table I(a) reports the performance metrics on the ARAMIS dataset, which remains the primary benchmark in this study because it matches the persistent-anomaly PdM setting in-troduced in Section IV. Table I(b) reports the results on SWaT as complementary cross-domain validation. We discuss ARAMIS first, since only this dataset supports the timing-aware interpretation based on the cost and early/late detection offsets. The SWaT results are then used to assess whether the architectural trends under partial federation remain consistent on a second industrial dataset. The PR-AUC values in Table I(a) provide a complementary threshold-independent reference and are broadly consistent with the trends observed for the calibrated metrics: LSTM-VAE and TAnoDDPM remain the strongest architectures, while TAnoWGAN is consistently less reliable. However, in our PdM setting, the practical differences between models are more meaningfully reflected by the time-offset and cost measures, since these capture the operational consequences of early versus late detection. The Independent Learning 

case yields poor performance across all models. The LSTM-VAE, for instance, drops from a Centralized F1-score of 0.952 to 0.753 when trained locally. The Full Federation 

case significantly bridges the gap. The Federated LSTM-VAE achieves an F1 score of 0.926, recovering most of the 

Centralized performance. Similarly, TAnoWGAN improves its F1 score from 0.700 ( Independent ) to 0.830 ( Full Fed ). FedSW-TSAD provides a useful reference point for modern federated GAN-based TSAD. In the Centralized setting, it improves over the plain TAnoWGAN baseline ( F1 = 0.890), confirming the benefit of stronger adversarial stabilization. However, under the tested federated configurations, it does not surpass the best-performing models in our study and remains below LSTM-VAE and TAnoDDPM. This suggests that improved GAN stabilization is beneficial, but does not overturn the broader trend observed here, namely that VAE-and diffusion-based models remain more robust under the considered heterogeneous federated PdM setup. Analyzing the partial federation strategies in Table I(a) reveals distinct performance outcomes. The VAE achieves higher utility when sharing the Encoder (F1 = 0.910) com-pared to sharing the Decoder (F1 = 0.870). Conversely, the Diffusion Model achieves better performance when sharing the Decoder (F1 = 0.885), surpassing even the fully feder-ated model ( F1 = 0.875). In contrast, TAnoWGAN scores decrease in the partial federation settings: both Encoder/Critic and Decoder/Generator sharing result in lower scores ( F1 =0.820 and 0.780) compared to full federation ( F1 = 0.830). Regarding the cost of misaligned detection, LSTM-VAE re-mains the most cost-efficient model in the federated setting (Cost = 0.505), closely mirroring the Centralized baseline (0.485). TAnoDDPM also maintains stable costs under partial federation, particularly in the Decoder-sharing setup ( Cost =0.540), and remains clearly more favorable than TAnoWGAN across the considered federated settings. Fig. 4 provides a detailed breakdown of the temporal detec-tion performance. It illustrates the average time offset ( ∆t) for each model, alongside specific metrics for late detection delays (∆tF N ) and early detection offsets ( ∆tF P ), across the five ex-perimental configurations. Across all federated setups (Fig. 4c, d, e), TAnoWGAN exhibits the highest time offsets (largest bars). In the Federated (Encoder/Critic) setup (Fig. 4d), the WGAN’s detection delay spikes significantly ( ∆tF P > 60 

atu). The LSTM-VAE (Fig. 4c) maintains the lowest time off-sets, comparable to the Centralized baseline. The TAnoDDPM shows remarkable stability in the Federated (Decoder) setup (Fig. 4e), with a time offset profile significantly lower than in the Federated (Encoder) setup (Fig. 4d). The complementary results on SWaT in Table I(b) support the same qualitative interpretation on a second industrial dataset. Centralized learning remains the strongest reference, independent training yields a clear degradation, and collab-orative training recovers most of the gap. Within partial federation, LSTM-VAE again benefits more from sharing the analysis component than the synthesis component ( F1 

= 0.871 vs. 0.854), whereas TAnoDDPM remains strongest when sharing the decoder ( F1 = 0.872), slightly outperforming full federation ( F1 = 0.867). TAnoWGAN and FedSW-TSAD both benefit from collaborative training relative to independent learning, but they remain below the best VAE- and DDPM-based configurations. Since SWaT is not evaluated with the timing-aware PdM metrics, these results should be interpreted as complementary evidence that the architectural preferences observed on ARAMIS are not purely dataset-specific. 

B. Discussion 

The comparison between Independent Learning and Cen-tralized Learning highlights the critical need for collaborative training in industrial PdM. The poor performance of indepen-dent models indicates that local datasets |Dc| are insufficient to capture the full manifold of normal operational conditions. Without exposure to the diverse operating conditions present in the global dataset, local models overfit to narrow patterns and fail to recognize legitimate but unseen normal behaviors, or conversely, fail to reconstruct anomalies that resemble unseen normal data. FL successfully aggregates this distributed knowledge, stabilizing the generative training process even for notoriously unstable architectures like GANs. A critical insight from this study emerges when analyzing 

Partial Federation strategies, revealing distinct architectural preferences that can guide deployment rules: 

VAE: In the VAE framework, the Encoder maps heteroge-neous sensor data to a normalized latent space. By sharing the Encoder, clients learn a unified mapping strategy, ensuring that the latent codes are consistent across the federation. The local Decoders can then specialize in reconstructing the specific noise profiles of their local sensors. 

GAN: The TAnoWGAN fails to benefit from partial feder-ation. This reinforces the finding that the adversarial equilib-rium is fragile; decoupling the generator and critic updates JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 12                                                                                                           

> Metrics Case Model F1 PRPR-AUC Cost
> Centr. LSTM-VAE 0.952 0.952 0.952 0.937 0.485
> TAnoWGAN 0.863 0.842 0.886 0.819 0.580 FedSW-TSAD 0.890 0.876 0.905 0.854 0.543 TAnoDDPM 0.906 0.897 0.914 0.875 0.520 Indep. LSTM-VAE 0.753 0.829 0.690 0.769 0.730 TAnoWGAN 0.700 0.695 0.705 0.678 0.810 FedSW-TSAD 0.748 0.817 0.690 0.763 0.735 TAnoDDPM 0.838 0.794 0.781 0.760 0.715
> Fed. (Full) LSTM-VAE 0.926 0.928 0.924 0.906 0.505
> TAnoWGAN 0.830 0.822 0.838 0.792 0.610 FedSW-TSAD 0.812 0.804 0.820 0.771 0.634 TAnoDDPM 0.875 0.869 0.881 0.841 0.555 Fed. (Enc.) LSTM-VAE 0.910 0.910 0.910 0.885 0.515
> TAnoWGAN 0.820 0.820 0.820 0.787 0.625 FedSW-TSAD 0.814 0.814 0.815 0.783 0.630 TAnoDDPM 0.850 0.854 0.846 0.819 0.585 Fed. (Dec.) LSTM-VAE 0.870 0.871 0.869 0.840 0.550 TAnoWGAN 0.780 0.778 0.782 0.748 0.680 FedSW-TSAD 0.751 0.748 0.753 0.720 0.720 TAnoDDPM 0.885 0.889 0.881 0.859 0.540

(a) Results on ARAMIS dataset                                                                                      

> Metrics Case Model F1 PRPR-AUC
> Centr. LSTM-VAE 0.895 0.912 0.878 0.900
> TAnoWGAN 0.812 0.825 0.800 0.820 FedSW-TSAD 0.856 0.868 0.845 0.864 TAnoDDPM 0.884 0.891 0.878 0.889 Indep. LSTM-VAE 0.842 0.861 0.824 0.847
> TAnoWGAN 0.748 0.760 0.736 0.756 FedSW-TSAD 0.795 0.809 0.781 0.804 TAnoDDPM 0.831 0.840 0.823 0.836 Fed. (Full) LSTM-VAE 0.880 0.896 0.865 0.886
> TAnoWGAN 0.792 0.804 0.780 0.801 FedSW-TSAD 0.838 0.850 0.826 0.846 TAnoDDPM 0.867 0.874 0.860 0.872 Fed. (Enc.) LSTM-VAE 0.871 0.887 0.856 0.878
> TAnoWGAN 0.776 0.790 0.763 0.786 FedSW-TSAD 0.829 0.842 0.817 0.839 TAnoDDPM 0.848 0.857 0.839 0.855 Fed. (Dec.) LSTM-VAE 0.854 0.869 0.840 0.861 TAnoWGAN 0.761 0.774 0.748 0.770 FedSW-TSAD 0.806 0.819 0.794 0.816 TAnoDDPM 0.872 0.880 0.865 0.878

(b) Results on SWaT dataset TABLE I: Performance comparison across Centralized, Independent, and Federated Learning settings. Table I(a) reports the ARAMIS benchmark, while Table I(b) reports the complementary cross-domain validation on the SWaT database. The results for Independent and Federated Learning settings are averaged over the clients. TABLE II: Communication cost per client and round under 32-bit parameter transmission. 

Model Strategy Shared params. Download Upload Total/round LSTM-VAE Full 942,956 3.77 MB 3.77 MB 7.54 MB Encoder 473,866 1.90 MB 1.90 MB 3.79 MB Decoder 469,090 1.88 MB 1.88 MB 3.75 MB TAnoWGAN Full 961,115 3.84 MB 3.84 MB 7.69 MB Encoder 472,705 1.89 MB 1.89 MB 3.78 MB Decoder 488,410 1.95 MB 1.95 MB 3.91 MB FedSW-TSAD Full (w. Predictor) 1,343,855 5.38 MB 5.38 MB 10.75 MB Encoder 131,201 0.52 MB 0.52 MB 1.05 MB Decoder 386,186 1.54 MB 1.54 MB 3.09 MB TAnoDDPM Full 1,022,922 4.09 MB 4.09 MB 8.18 MB Encoder 544,864 2.18 MB 2.18 MB 4.36 MB Decoder 478,058 1.91 MB 1.91 MB 3.82 MB 

disrupts the training dynamics, leading to inferior conver-gence. Finally, the timing analysis provides insight into the reliability of these models. The highly dynamic behavior of TAnoWGAN suggests the critic struggles to generalize, causing the model to miss the initial onset of degradation until the signal becomes highly abnormal. The LSTM-VAE’s deterministic reconstruction error provides a smooth, reliable signal that crosses the detection threshold promptly after a fault occurs. The stability of TAnoDDPM in the Federated (Decoder) setup corroborates the finding that Decoder sharing is the optimal strategy for Diffusion models, minimizing detection delays. The comparison with FedSW-TSAD further indicates that the limitation how well a given adversarial design tolerates heterogeneity and aggregation. In this respect, Sobolev–Wasserstein regularization improves the centralized behavior of adversarial TSAD, yet our results still show a less favorable robustness/communication trade-off than the best VAE- and DDPM-based configurations on this benchmark. 

DDPM: In a significant deviation from the VAE, the Diffusion Model benefits from sharing the Decoder (the denoising U-Net’s upsampling path). This allows the fed-eration to agree on the fundamental structure of the signal generation/reconstruction, while keeping the Encoder (down-sampling/conditioning) local allows for personalized feature extraction. This configuration also yields the lowest cost for DDPM (0.540), making it a highly attractive option for bandwidth-constrained high-fidelity generation. The SWaT set results reinforce the main conclusions that can be drawn from the ARAMIS set. Although SWaT is oper-ationally different from ARAMIS and is evaluated only with standard detection metrics, the same qualitative tendencies persist: independent local training underperforms collaborative training, VAE benefits more from sharing the analysis com-ponent, and DDPM benefits more from sharing the synthesis component. This cross-domain consistency supports the pro-posed partial-federation taxonomy while keeping ARAMIS as the main benchmark for the timing-aware PdM evaluation. 

C. Communication and Edge-Device Overhead 

To complement the detection results, we quantify the com-munication burden of each federation policy during FL pro-cess. The client-specific threshold calibration discussed in Sec-JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 13    

> (a) Centralized Learning (b) Independent Learning
> (c) Federated Learning (Full) (d) Federated Learning (Encoder) (e) Federated Learning (Decoder)

Fig. 4: Time offset for different experimental setups: a) - Centralized Learning; b) - Independent Learning; c) Federated Learning with full model transmission; d) - Federated Learning with Encoder/Critic sharing; e) - Federated Learning with Decoder/Generator sharing. Blue color represents the average offset for the late detection; Green color represents average early detection offset while orange color shows the average absolute offset. tions IV-C and V-A is performed only once after training on a held-out validation set by optimizing a scalar threshold, and is therefore treated as an offline model-selection step rather than as part of the federated communication rounds or the online inference budget. Let Pshare denote the number of trainable parameters shared with the server. In each communication round, a participating client downloads Pshare parameters and uploads the updated Pshare parameters after local training. Hence, the bidirectional number of transmitted parameters per client and round is 

N (r)tx = 2 Pshare , V (r)tx = 8 Pshare bytes , (23) assuming 32-bit floating-point transmission. Over R rounds with C participating clients, the total exchanged volume is 

Vtot = 8 CRP share bytes . (24) Moreover, over a link with bandwidth B bit/s, the communi-cation latency per client and round is 

T (r)comm = 64 Pshare 

B . (25) Table II reports the exact number of shared parameters and the corresponding bidirectional traffic per client and round for the considered federation strategies. As expected, partial federation substantially reduces the communication payload. Compared with full federation, encoder sharing reduces the communicated payload by 49 .7% , 50 .8% , 90 .2% , and 46 .7% 

for LSTM-VAE, TAnoWGAN, FedSW-TSAD, and TAnoD-DPM, respectively, while decoder sharing reduces it by 50 .3% ,

49 .2% , 71 .3% , and 53 .3% . The much larger reduction for FedSW-TSAD in the encoder case is due to the fact that the predictor is transmitted only in the full-federation setup, whereas in the partial setups it remains local. Given that all C = 5 clients are selected each round, the total footprint over R = 30 rounds and considering full and partial (encoder/decoder) federation cases is 1.13 /0.57 /0.56 

GB for LSTM-VAE, 1.15 /0.57 /0.59 GB for TAnoWGAN, 

1.61 /0.16 /0.46 GB for FedSW-TSAD, and 1.23 /0.65 /0.57 

GB for TAnoDDPM, for full/encoder/decoder federation ,respectively. For a representative 10 Mbps edge link, the corresponding communication latency per client and round is 6.03 /3.03 /3.00 [sec.] for LSTM-VAE, 6.15 /3.03 /3.13 

[sec.] for TAnoWGAN, 8.60 /0.84 /2.47 [sec.] for FedSW-TSAD, and 6.55 /3.49 /3.06 [sec.] for TAnoDDPM. Therefore, FedSW-TSAD has the highest communication cost in the full-federation case, but also benefits the most from partial federation, especially in the encoder-only setup. Since all federation strategies use the same local training budget, the difference in end-to-end training time is due only to the communication term in (25). VII. C ONCLUSIONS 

This work presented a systematic evaluation of generative models for time series anomaly detection within Federated Learning environments. We addressed the dual challenges of data heterogeneity and resource constraints in Industrial IoT by benchmarking VAEs, GANs, and Diffusion Models under partial federation strategies. Our findings lead to three key conclusions. First, FL successfully stabilizes generative training on distributed, non-IID TS data, recovering most of the utility of centralized training without sharing raw sensor data. Second, the evaluation across both the primary ARAMIS benchmark and the complementary SWaT dataset confirms that no single architecture is universally optimal, although the main partial-federation trends remain consistent across JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 14 

the two datasets. VAEs yield the highest stability and low-est deployment costs, while DDPMs show superior potential under permissible bandwidth conditions, especially via partial federation. In contrast, the evaluated GAN-based baselines, TAnoWGAN and FedSW-TSAD, were less effective in this federated TSAD setting than the VAE- and DDPM-based alternatives under the tested configurations: FedSW-TSAD improved over plain TAnoWGAN in the centralized setting, but neither adversarial model matched the robustness of the VAE- and DDPM-based approaches under federation. This observation should be interpreted as specific to the selected architectures and training setups, rather than as a general conclusion about all GAN-based federated TSAD methods. Finally, we demonstrated that the proposed partial federation approach is not merely a compression technique but a per-sonalization enabler. Specifically, sharing the Encoder benefits VAEs, while sharing the Decoder benefits DDPMs. Moreover, both LSTM-VAE and TAnoDDPM remain the most reliable and cost-effective choices for general-purpose federated PdM, offering high stability and low computational cost, even with partial federation, thus on average reducing communication overhead by ≈ 50% while achieving a high F1-score and small detection offsets. Because the considered VAE, GAN, and DDPM imple-mentations are highly non-convex neural architectures trained under heterogeneous client distributions, this paper does not claim a formal monotonic-convergence theorem for the result-ing federated objectives, nor a closed-form bound on latent collapse or covariate shift. The contribution is instead to provide: i) a structural interpretation of partial federation in terms of shared analysis/synthesis modules, and ii) empirical evidence showing when this partitioning improves stability, utility, and communication efficiency. Future work will focus on enhancing both the security and efficiency of the proposed federated framework. First, we intend to conduct a rigorous analysis of model convergence un-der differential privacy (DP) constraints, specifically quantify-ing the trade-off between strict privacy budgets and the utility of generative models in anomaly detection tasks. Second, we plan to evaluate model robustness under gradient compression and sparsification techniques (such as quantization and top-k

sparsification) to further reduce communication overhead in bandwidth-constrained environments. REFERENCES [1] M. Nagy, M. Figura, K. Valaskova, and G. L˘ az˘ aroiu, “Predictive maintenance algorithms, artificial intelligence digital twin technologies, and internet of robotic things in big data-driven industry 4.0 manufacturing systems,” Mathematics , vol. 13, no. 6, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2227-7390/13/6/981 [2] E. Zio, “Prognostics and health management (phm): Where are we and where do we (need to) go in theory and practice,” Reliability Engineering & System Safety , vol. 218, p. 108119, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0951832021006153 [3] S. Kim, H. Seo, and E. C. Lee, “Advanced anomaly detection in manufacturing processes: Leveraging feature value analysis for normalizing anomalous data,” Electronics , vol. 13, no. 7, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/13/7/1384 [4] M. Evangelou and N. M. Adams, “An anomaly de-tection framework for cyber-security data,” Computers &Security , vol. 97, p. 101941, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404820302170 [5] D. Samariya, J. Ma, S. Aryal, and X. Zhao, “Detection and explanation of anomalies in healthcare data,” Health Information Science and Systems , vol. 11, no. 1, p. 20, Apr 2023. [6] A. Klein and W. Lehner, “Representing data quality in sensor data streaming environments,” ACM J. Data Inf. Qual. , vol. 1, pp. 10:1–10:28, 2009. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:17086637 [7] S. Bond-Taylor, A. Leach, Y. Long, and C. G. Willcocks, “Deep generative modelling: A comparative review of vaes, gans, normalizing flows, energy-based and autoregressive models,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 7327– 7347, 2022. [8] European Parliament and Council of the European Union, “Regulation (eu) 2016/679 of the european parliament and of the council (general data protection regulation),” Official Journal of the European Union, L 119, 4 May 2016, pp. 1–88, May 2016, oJ L 119, 4.5.2016, pp. 1–88. [Online]. Available: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj [9] Q. Li, Y. Diao, Q. Chen, and B. He, “Federated learning on non-iid data silos: An experimental study,” in 2022 IEEE 38th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) , 2022, pp. 965–978. [10] Z. Almudayni, B. Soh, H. Samra, and A. Li, “Energy inefficiency in iot networks: Causes, impact, and a strategic framework for sustainable optimisation,” Electronics , vol. 14, no. 1, p. 159, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics14010159 [11] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas, “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.05629 [12] E. Dritsas and M. Trigka, “Federated learning for iot: A survey of techniques, challenges, and applications,” Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks , vol. 14, no. 1, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2224-2708/14/1/9 [13] X. Zhang, H. Zhao, W. Zhang, S. Cao, H. Sun, and B. Zhang, “Fedsw-tsad: SWGAN-based federated time series anomaly detection,” Sensors ,vol. 25, no. 13, p. 4014, 2025. [14] U. Milasheuski, P. Baraldi, E. Zio, and S. Savazzi, “Federated generative models for predictive maintenance in industrial environments,” in 2024 8th International Conference on System Reliability and Safety (ICSRS) ,2024, pp. 156–161. [15] S. Thudumu, P. Branch, J. Jin, and J. J. Singh, “A comprehensive survey of anomaly detection techniques for high dimensional big data,” 

Journal of Big Data , vol. 7, no. 1, p. 42, July 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-020-00320-x [16] H. Huang, P. Wang, J. Pei, J. Wang, S. Alexanian, and D. Niyato, “Deep learning advancements in anomaly detection: A comprehensive survey,” 

IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 12, no. 21, pp. 44 318–44 342, 2025. [17] W. Li and T. Li, “Comparison of deep learning models for predictive maintenance in industrial manufacturing systems using sensor data,” 

Scientific Reports , vol. 15, no. 1, p. 23545, Jul 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-08515-z [18] T. Zhu, Y. Ran, X. Zhou, and Y. Wen, “A survey on intelligent predictive maintenance (ipdm) in the era of fully connected intelligence,” 

IEEE Communications Surveys &; Tutorials , p. 1–1, 2025. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2025.3567802 [19] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114 [20] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial networks,” 2014. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.2661 [21] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” ArXiv , vol. abs/2006.11239, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:219955663 [22] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for robot-assisted feeding using an lstm-based variational autoencoder,” 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, 2018. [23] L. Li, J. Yan, H. Wang, and Y. Jin, “Anomaly detection of time series with smoothness-inducing sequential variational auto-encoder,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.01331 [24] S. Lin, R. Clark, R. Birke, S. Sch¨ onborn, N. Trigoni, and S. Roberts, “Anomaly detection for time series using vae-lstm hybrid model,” in 

ICASSP 2020 - 2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , 2020, pp. 4322–4326. [25] M. A. Bashar and R. Nayak, “Tanogan: Time series anomaly detection with generative adversarial networks,” in 2020 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI) , 2020, pp. 1778–1785. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 15 

[26] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “Mad-gan: Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative ad-versarial networks,” in Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning – ICANN 2019: Text and Time Series , I. V. Tetko, V. K˚ urkov´ a, P. Karpov, and F. Theis, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 703–716. [27] A. Geiger, D. Liu, S. Alnegheimish, A. Cuesta-Infante, and K. Veera-machaneni, “Tadgan: Time series anomaly detection using generative adversarial networks,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data) , 2020, pp. 33–43. [28] J.-Y. Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Unpaired image-to-image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.10593 [29] P. Dhariwal and A. Nichol, “Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.05233 , 2021. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:234357997 [30] J. Wyatt, A. Leach, S. M. Schmon, and C. G. Willcocks, “Anoddpm: Anomaly detection with denoising diffusion probabilistic models using simplex noise,” in 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW) , 2022, pp. 649–655. [31] R. Hu, X. Yuan, Y. Qiao, B. Zhang, and P. Zhao, “Unsupervised anomaly detection for multivariate time series using diffusion model,” in ICASSP 2024 - 2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , 2024, pp. 9606–9610. [32] C. Fan and P. Liu, “Federated generative adversarial learning,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.03793 [33] K. Zhang, Y. Jiang, L. Seversky, C. Xu, D. Liu, and H. Song, “Federated variational learning for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in 

2021 IEEE International Performance, Computing, and Communications Conference (IPCCC) , 2021, pp. 1–9. [34] M. de Goede, B. Cox, and J. Decouchant, “Training diffusion models with federated learning,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.12575 [35] M. G. Arivazhagan, V. Aggarwal, A. K. Singh, and S. Choudhary, “Federated learning with personalization layers,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.00818 [36] P. P. Liang, T. Liu, L. Ziyin, R. Salakhutdinov, and L. Morency, “Think locally, act globally: Federated learning with local and global representations,” CoRR , vol. abs/2001.01523, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2001.01523 [37] J. Zhang, Z. Zhou, Y. Li, and Q. Jin, “Fl-plas: Federated learning with partial layer aggregation for backdoor defense against high-ratio malicious clients,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.12019 [38] I. Tziotis, Z. Shen, R. Pedarsani, H. Hassani, and A. Mokhtari, “Straggler-resilient personalized federated learning,” Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=gxEpUFxIgz [39] J. Hao, P. Chen, J. Chen, and X. Li, “Effectively detecting and diagnos-ing distributed multivariate time series anomalies via unsupervised fed-erated hypernetwork,” Information Processing & Management , vol. 62, no. 4, p. 104107, 2025. [40] H. Jiang, X. Chen, D. Miao, H. Zhang, X. Qin, S. Du, and P. Lu, “Privtsad-fedwgan: A novel federated learning and wgan framework for privacy-preserving multivariate time series anomaly detection,” Expert Systems with Applications , vol. 307, p. 131049, 01 2026. [41] Z. Soi, C. Fan, A. Shankar, A. Malan, and L. Chen, Federated Time Series Generation on Feature and Temporally Misaligned Data , 09 2025, pp. 384–399. [42] S. Chen, G. Long, J. Jiang, and C. Zhang, “Federated foundation models on heterogeneous time series,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 39, no. 15, 2025, pp. 15 839–15 847. [43] S. Chen, G. Long, M. Blumenstein, and J. Jiang, “Fedal: Federated dataset learning for general time series foundation models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.04045 , 2025, accepted at ICLR 2026. [44] L. Collins, H. Hassani, A. Mokhtari, and S. Shakkottai, “Exploiting shared representations for personalized federated learning,” in 

Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, M. Meila and T. Zhang, Eds., vol. 139. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021, pp. 2089–2099. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/collins21a.html [45] Y. Wei, J. Jang-Jaccard, W. Xu, F. Sabrina, S. Camtepe, and M. Boulic, “Lstm-autoencoder-based anomaly detection for indoor air quality time-series data,” IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 3787–3800, 2023. [46] T. Salimans, I. Goodfellow, W. Zaremba, V. Cheung, A. Radford, and X. Chen, “Improved techniques for training gans,” 2016. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.03498 [47] Y. Kossale, M. Airaj, and A. Darouichi, “Mode collapse in generative adversarial networks: An overview,” in 2022 8th International Confer-ence on Optimization and Applications (ICOA) , 2022, pp. 1–6. [48] M. Arjovsky, S. Chintala, and L. Bottou, “Wasserstein gan,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.07875 [49] I. Gulrajani, F. Ahmed, M. Arjovsky, V. Dumoulin, and A. Courville, “Improved training of wasserstein gans,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.00028 [50] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2015 , N. Navab, J. Horneg-ger, W. M. Wells, and A. F. Frangi, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 234–241. [51] M. Perslev, M. H. Jensen, S. Darkner, P. J. Jennum, and C. Igel, U-Time: a fully convolutional network for time series segmentation applied to sleep staging . Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2019. [52] P. I. Frazier, “A tutorial on bayesian optimization,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.02811 [53] P. Baraldi, M. Compare, E. Zio, F. Cannarile, and Z. Yang, “The aramis data challenge to prognostics and health management methods for application in evolving environments,” Journal of Risk and Reliability ,vol. 237, no. 5, pp. 958–965, October 2023. [Online]. Available: https://ideas.repec.org/a/sae/risrel/v237y2023i5p958-965.html [54] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “Swat: a water treatment testbed for research and training on ics security,” in 2016 International Workshop on Cyber-physical Systems for Smart Water Networks (CySWater) , 2016, pp. 31–36. [55] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980 [56] L. Ouyang and Y. Gao, “C-mapss dataset,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://dx.doi.org/10.21227/q7dr-1b93 [57] M. Chao, C. Arias, K. Kulkarni, K. Goebel, and O. Fink, “Turbofan engine degradation simulation data set 2 (n-cmapss),” N-CMAPSS DS02-006.h5, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://ti.arc.nasa.gov/tech/dash/groups/pcoe/prognostic-data-repository/#turbofan [58] D. Wei, “Edd datasets,” May 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.25844203.v2