Title: Stop Denoising Your Blurs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25014v1

Published Time: Tue, 26 May 2026 01:57:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
STOP DENOISING YOUR BLURS 

Sasidhar Parvathireddy , Vamsidhar Saraswathula , Rama Krishna Gorthi 

Indian Institute of Technology Tirupati, India. 

ABSTRACT 

In recent times, diffusion models have achieved remark-able performance in image restoration tasks. Their core mechanism relies on the restricted presumption of degra-dation prior to the additive noise operation. However, the blur model, one of the most widely studied degradation formulations, violates this assumption, as it is inherently based on convolution rather than addition. In this paper, we introduce ConvDiff , a novel diffusion based frame-work that substitutes the additive operation with convo-lution for the task of image deblurring. In the forward process, we construct a meaningful trajectory from the clean image to its blurred counterpart by exploiting the frequency domain characteristics of convolution, rather than progressively corrupting the image with additive noise. While the current work instantiates this frame-work for Gaussian blur, where frequency-domain decom-position yields closed-form and physically valid inter-mediate states, the underlying principle of constructing degradation trajectories from the blur operator extends naturally to other blur families. This formulation bridges the gap between the mathematical principles of blurring and the iterative design of diffusion-based restoration algorithms, enabling more physically grounded and ef-fective image restoration models. 

Index Terms — Convolution, Frequency Domain, ConvDiff, Image Deblurring, and Image Restoration 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Diffusion models [1] have made a remarkable impact in the field of computer vision, achieving unprecedented  

> ©2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permis-sion from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for ad-vertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

performance in image generation. The principle behind diffusion models is to generate images by decomposing the complex generation task into a sequence of small, learnable denoising steps. During training, the images are progressively corrupted with Gaussian noise to pro-duce intermediate noisy representations, and the model learns to invert this gradual corruption process to recon-struct the original data distribution. Diffusion models have also been extended to image restoration tasks such as deblurring and super-resolution, where the model is conditioned on a degraded image and learns to generate its clean counterpart from pure noise through iterative denoising, as first demonstrated in the SR3 model [2]. However, this approach introduces a fun-damental mismatch when applied to image deblurring, where degradation arises from convolution, not addi-tive noise. While diffusion models simulate degradation through additive white Gaussian noise, deblurring in-volves a blur kernel acting as a convolution operator. Consequently, the intermediate images generated along the diffusion path lack physical significance when viewed from the true degradation perspective. Works like Cold Diffusion [3] , Inverse Heat Dissi-pation [4] and Progressive Blur [5] substitute Gaussian noise with Gaussian blur producing visually coherent but physically unconstrained intermediate states. However they focus on unconditional image generation rather than true restoration. Recently, works such as FideDiff [6] and BlurDM [7] integrate blur physics into diffusion models by us-ing simulated exposure time to control the strength of blur in each forward step. While this successfully cre-ates meaningful intermediate states, its reliance on an exposure-time restricts its applicability to motion blur. This motivates a more general formulation - one that derives the degradation trajectory directly from the ob-served blur kernel itself, rather than from any auxiliary physical model. 

> arXiv:2605.25014v1 [cs.CV] 24 May 2026

Fig. 1 : Generated intermediate images (for T= 4) and their corresponding Fourier Transforms between a sharp and blurred image pair (for gaussian blur) A key challenge in designing a physically consistent iterative deblurring framework is that convolution is in-herently a single-step operation, making it difficult to integrate into a multi-step iterative model. Some prior works, such as [8], attempt to decompose a blur ker-nel into interpretable physical components (e.g., trajec-tory, intensity, or point spread function). While such approaches offer valuable insight, they still do not yield partially blurred intermediate images, leaving the need for a mechanism that meaningfully bridges sharp and blurred states. In this work, propose ConvDiff , a physically-aware iterative deblurring framework built directly on convo-lutional operations, which we instantiate and validate for Gaussian blur. Unlike conventional diffusion mod-els that rely on additive noise, ConvDiff replaces the noise process with a convolutional mechanism, decom-posing a single-step blur into a progressive, multi-step sequence governed by frequency-domain properties of convolution. This formulation enables the generation of physically meaningful intermediate images that bridge sharp and blurred states. We further demonstrate that this generic and physically grounded approach achieves im-proved restoration performance compared to traditional diffusion-based methods, highlighting the importance of degradation-specific model design. 

2. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY 2.1. Problem formulation for progressive blurring 

Assume 𝑘 blur denotes the degradation blur kernel that relates the sharp ( 𝑥 ) and blurred ( 𝑦 ) images. The rela-tionship of 𝑥 ,𝑦 , and 𝑘 blur in the spatial domain is given in Eq. 1. 

𝑦 = 𝑥 ∗ 𝑘 blur (1) Taking Fourier transform of Eq.1 gives, 

𝑌 = 𝑋 · 𝐻 blur (2) Let F { 𝑥 } = 𝑋, F { 𝑦 } = 𝑌 , F { 𝑘 blur } = 𝐻 blur where 

F {·} denote the Fourier Transform. We aim to decom-pose the overall blur kernel into a sequence of smaller, in-cremental kernels that together reproduce the same final blur. Owing to the associative property of convolution [?], a system can be represented as a cascade of n sequen-tial subsystems whose combined effect is equivalent to that of the original blur kernel. 

𝑘 blur = 𝑘 1 ∗ 𝑘 2 ∗ 𝑘 3 ∗ ....... ∗ 𝑘 𝑛 (3) Using the above factorization, we can rewrite the overall blur operation as a sequence of convolutions ap-plied to the sharp image, 

𝑦 = ((( 𝑥 0 ∗ 𝑘 1) ∗ 𝑘 2) ∗ 𝑘 3)...... ) ∗ 𝑘 𝑛 (4) Let us refer the sharp image 𝑥 with 𝑥 0 from here and 𝑥 𝑡 

denotes the intermediate image obtained after 𝑡 stages of blur. Then we can write : 

𝑥 𝑡 = 𝑥 0 ∗ ¯𝑘 𝑡 , where ¯𝑘 𝑡 = 𝑘 1 ∗ 𝑘 2 ∗ · · · ∗ 𝑘 𝑡 (5) Note that 𝑦 = 𝑥 0 ∗ ¯𝑘 𝑛 and with ¯𝑘 𝑡 we can calculate any corresponding intermediate image 𝑥 𝑡 . Taking the Fourier transform of Eq. 3 gives: 

𝐻 blur = 𝐻 1 · 𝐻 2 · 𝐻 3 · ....... · 𝐻 𝑛 (6) Now, we generate 𝑛 intermediate images between 𝑥 0 and 

𝑦 , assigning each step an equal fraction of the total blur 

𝐻 𝑘 , which is given in Eq.7. 

𝐻 𝑘 = 𝐻 1

> 𝑛
> blur

, ∀𝑘 ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , 𝑛 }. (7) From Eq.5 and Eq.7 we can write 

F { ¯𝑘 𝑡 } = 𝐻 𝑡 𝑛  

> 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑟

(8) 

𝑋 𝑡 = 𝑋 0 · 𝐻 𝑡 𝑛  

> 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑟

(9) where 𝑋 𝑡 = F { 𝑥 𝑡 } and 𝑋 0 = F { 𝑥 0}. Let us define 

𝛽 = 𝑡 𝑛 , where 𝛽 is degradation strength and is 0 < 𝛽 ≤

1. Here 𝛽 = 𝑡 𝑛 controls the progression of blur. As 

𝛽 → 0, 𝑥 𝑡 approaches the sharp image 𝑥 0; as 𝛽 → 1, it converges to the fully blurred image 𝑦 . The frequency components of the blur kernel are modulated such that their magnitudes are exponentially scaled and their phase terms are linearly scaled by a factor of 𝛽 . This controlled attenuation yields a partially blurred image in the spatial domain. 

𝐻 𝛽  

> blur

= |𝐻 blur |𝛽 𝑒 𝑗 𝜙𝛽 (10) For Eq.9 to yield physically meaningful intermediate images, 𝐻 𝛽 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑟 must remain a valid blur kernel, that is, its inverse Fourier transform should be real, non-negative, normalized, and spatially localized. This is guaranteed for Gaussian blur kernels, because the Fourier transform of a Gaussian is itself Gaussian, and the fractional powers of the Gaussians remain Gaussian. Figure 1 illustrates the intermediate results obtained for the sharp and blurred image pair using the equations mentioned above. The blur strength is seen to increase progressively from left to right, while the corresponding Fourier spectra demonstrate a systematic reduction in high-frequency content. 

2.2. Progressive deblurring 

Let us denote the degradation function that generates intermediate images with 𝐷 (𝑥 0, 𝑘 blur , 𝛽 ), where 0 ≤ 𝛽 ≤

1.

𝑥 𝛽 = 𝐷 (𝑥 0, 𝑘 blur , 𝛽 ) = F −1{𝑋 0.𝐻 𝛽 

> blur

} (11) where F −1{·} denotes Inverse Fourier transform. If the blur kernels are available, they can be directly uti-lized; otherwise, they can be estimated using the Wiener inverse filtering formulation [9] [10] as given in Eq. 12. The Wiener-based estimation approach stabilizes frequency-domain division by introducing a regulariza-tion term 𝑆 . In noise-free or synthetic datasets, 𝑆 can be set to a small positive constant to ensure stable inver-sion without significantly distorting the estimated kernel. For our dataset, we empirically determined the optimal value of 𝑆 by evaluating reconstruction performance over a range of candidate values and selecting the one that achieved the best visual fidelity and quantitative accu-racy. Specifically, we employed 𝑆 = 10 −8 for all experi-ments. 

𝐻 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑟 = 𝑌 .𝑋 ∗

(| 𝑋 |2 + 𝑆 ) (12) where 𝑋 ∗ is the complex conjugate of X 

3. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 3.1. Training 

The objective is to design a deep learning model that approximates the inverse of the degradation function 𝐷 .We denote this inverse approximation as 𝐼 𝜃 (𝑥 𝛽 , 𝛽 ) ≈ ˆ𝑥 0,where the model predicts the sharp image 𝑥 0 given a degraded image 𝑥 𝛽 and its corresponding degradation strength 𝛽 . Similar to diffusion models, during training, a random intermediate state 𝑥 𝛽 is generated, and the model learns to reconstruct the original clean image 𝑥 0 from this partially degraded version. This process enables the network to learn the direction along which the restoration trajectory should evolve. Unlike conventional diffusion models that rely on dis-crete timesteps, ConvDiff assumes a continuous degra-dation process, where 𝛽 ∼ U ( 0, 1) following the formu-lation of INDI [11]. The network is therefore trained to predict the final sharp image ˆ𝑥 0 from any interme-diate degraded state 𝑥 𝛽 sampled along this continuous degradation path. A variant of U-Net with ConvNext [12] blocks, sim-ilar to the network used in Cold Diffusion [3], is em-ployed to approximate the inverse degradation function 

𝐼 𝜃 (𝑥 𝛽 , 𝛽 ).

3.2. Inference 

During the inference stage of diffusion models, the model performs a denoising process: given a noisy sample 𝑥 𝑡 ,Algorithm 1: Training procedure for ConvDiff 

Input: Input sharp image 𝑥 0

for each training sample do 

Randomly sample 𝛽 ∼ U ( 0, 1];Generate degraded image: 

𝑥 𝛽 = 𝐷 (𝑥 0, 𝑘 blur , 𝛽 );Predict: ˆ𝑥 0 = 𝐼 𝜃 (𝑥 𝛽 , 𝛽 );Compute loss: L = ∥ ˆ𝑥 0 − 𝑥 0 ∥22;Back-propagate and update network parameters ( 𝐼 𝜃 ) to minimize L;

end 

it predicts the noise component added at step 𝑡 . This prediction, combined with the known diffusion schedule parameters, is then used to compute a less noisy sample 

𝑥 𝑡 −1. The intermediate image 𝑥 𝑡 −1 is subsequently fed back into the model, and the procedure is iterated for 𝑛 

steps to reconstruct the final clean sample 𝑥 0.

ConvDiff follows a similar iterative mechanism but performs progressive deblurring in the frequency do-main. At each time step 𝑡 , the model 𝐼 predicts a cleaner estimate of the target image 𝑥 0. We compute the Fourier transforms of both the current prediction ˆ𝑥 0 and the ini-tial blurred input image 𝑦 , and estimate a temporary blur kernel ˜𝐻 blur corresponding to the current step using the kernel approximation function defined in Eq. 12. This operation can be denoted as follws: 

𝑊  F { ˆ𝑥 0}, F { 𝑦 } = ˜𝐻 blur , (13) where 𝑊 (·) represents the Wiener-based kernel esti-mation function from Eq. 12. The estimated kernel ˜𝐻 blur 

is then used in Eq. 9 to generate the next intermediate image for the reverse process, which is fed back into the model at step 𝑡 − 1. This iterative refinement continues until until 𝑡 = 0, yielding the final restored sharp image 

ˆ𝑥 0.

3.3. Dataset details 

For training and evaluation, we used the DIV2K dataset [13], which comprises 800 high-quality natural images at 2K resolution for training and 100 images for testing. To simulate degradation, each image was convolved with a Gaussian blur kernel of size 15 × 15 , where the stan-dard deviation 𝜎 was randomly sampled from the range 

[2, 4]. From the resulting degraded images, patches of 

Algorithm 2: Inference algorithm for ConvD-iff 

Input: Blurred image 𝑦 

Initialize 𝑥 𝑡 = 𝑦 ;

for 𝑡 = 𝑛, 𝑛 − 1, 𝑛 − 2, . . . , 1 do 

ˆ𝑥 0 = 𝐼 𝜃 (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑡 𝑛 );

˜𝐻 blur = 𝑊 (F { ˆ𝑥 }, F { 𝑦 }) ;

𝑥 𝑡 −1 = 𝐷 ( ˆ𝑥 0, ˜𝐻 blur , 𝑡 −1 

> 𝑛

);

end Output: ˆ𝑥 0

size 128 × 128 were extracted to construct the training set. 

4. RESULTS 

Our primary comparison focuses on two traditional iterative restoration baselines: the noise-driven diffu-sion model SR3 [2] and the interpolation-based model INDI [11]. All three models, ConvDiff , SR3, and INDI, were trained using the same U-Net architecture aug-mented with ConvNeXt blocks, ensuring consistency in network configuration and depth across implemen-tations. INDI, proposed as an alternative to diffusion models, generates intermediate representations via di-rect linear interpolation between the sharp and blurred images. During evaluation, ConvDiff was tested with 𝑛 = 5

time steps, INDI with 𝑛 = 10 , and SR3 with 𝑛 = 2000 

steps, following their respective original implementa-tions. As illustrated in Fig. 2, ConvDiff produces sharper and more detailed restorations compared to both SR3 and INDI. Quantitative results presented in Table 1 further support these findings. SR3 tends to oversmooth textures and fails to recover fine high-frequency details, whereas INDI introduces noticeable block-like artifacts at high magnification. In contrast, ConvDiff more effectively restores edge sharpness and intricate structures. However, slight residual noise remains in the Con-vDiff outputs. This is primarily attributed to the iterative Wiener-based kernel estimation used during inference, which may induce minor artifacts that propagate and accumulate through successive time steps. This error propagation likely limits the model’s convergence and explains why the quantitative metrics, while superior to traditional diffusion baselines, remain lower than recent Fig. 2 : Comparison between ConvDiff and other iterative deblurring frameworks (SR3, INDI). end-to-end state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. We compare ConvDiff with several such SOTA restoration networks, including FFTformer [14], Restormer [15], DiffIR [16], and HiDiff [17]. These models leverage latent-space priors, multi-scale diffusion mechanisms, and adaptive frequency-domain attention to achieve enhanced performance. Intermediate predictions at suc-cessive time steps for our model are shown in Fig. 3, where the gradual recovery of high-frequency compo-nents can be clearly seen. 

Table 1 : Quantitative comparison: ConvDiff vs. tradi-tional diffusion based methods and other state-of-the-art approaches. Method PSNR SSIM LPIPS SR3 25.3499 0.6747 0.3167 INDI 26.0933 0.7038 0.2073 

ConvDiff 29.5927 0.7809 0.1701 

FFTformer 30.8348 0.8760 0.1175 Restormer 30.9187 0.8760 0.1337 DiffIR 31.1574 0.8795 0.1393 HiDiff 31.2655 0.8805 0.1379 

Fig. 3 : Predicted sharp images and their Fourier Trans-forms at different time steps. 

5. CONCLUSION 

To conclude, ConvDiff introduces an iterative frequency-domain deblurring framework that progressively recon-structs sharp images by factorizing the blur kernel. This physically interpretable formulation bridges diffusion and convolution based restoration. However, the current formulation has certain limitations. This formulation assumes spatially invariant Gaussian blur, and thus can-not be applied directly on spatially variant degradations like motion blur. Additionally, while inference operates in a blind setting through iterative kernel re-estimation, training requires access to the blur kernels for better estimation of sharp images. The iterative Wiener based re-estimation during inference, while enabling blind restoration, introduces approximation errors that likely account for the residual performance gap relative to end-to-end trained methods. While not yet achieving state-of-the-art performance, ConvDiff demonstrates clear improvements in sharpness and structure over conventional diffusion and linear interpolation based methods, highlighting the importance of degradation-specific process design. Future work may explore learned or regularized kernel estimation to replace the current Wiener based approach, extend the framework to spatially variant blur, and adapt the convolutional trajectory to other blur families, for instance, motion blur by parameterizing kernel geometric properties like spread and orientation - pointing toward a broader vision of degradation aware iterative restoration governed by the physics of the degradation itself. 

6. REFERENCES 

[1] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel, “De-noising diffusion probabilistic models,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 6840–6851, 2020. [2] Chitwan Saharia, Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Tim Salimans, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi, “Image super-resolution via iterative refinement,” 

IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 4713–4726, 2022. [3] Arpit Bansal, Eitan Borgnia, Hong-Min Chu, Jie Li, Hamid Kazemi, Furong Huang, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein, “Cold diffu-sion: Inverting arbitrary image transforms without noise,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 36, pp. 41259–41282, 2023. [4] Severi Rissanen, Markus Heinonen, and Arno Solin, “Generative modelling with inverse heat dissipation,” in The Eleventh International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2023. [5] Sangyun Lee, Hyungjin Chung, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jong Chul Ye, “Progressive deblurring of diffusion models for coarse-to-fine image synthesis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.11192 , 2022. [6] Xiaoyang Liu, Zhengyan Zhou, Zihang Xu, Jiezhang Cao, Zheng Chen, and Yulun Zhang, “Fidediff: Efficient diffusion model for high-fidelity image motion deblurring,” 2025. [7] Jin-Ting He, Fu-Jen Tsai, Yan-Tsung Peng, Min-Hung Chen, Chia-Wen Lin, and Yen-Yu Lin, “Blurdm: A blur diffusion model for image de-blurring,” in The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [8] Lu Fang, Haifeng Liu, Feng Wu, Xiaoyan Sun, and Houqiang Li, “Separable kernel for image deblur-ring,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2014, pp. 2885–2892. [9] Norbert Wiener, Extrapolation, Interpolation, and Smoothing of Stationary Time Series , MIT Press, 1949. [10] Almerico Murli, Luisa D’Amore, and Valentina De Simone, “The wiener filter and regularization methods for image restoration problems,” in Pro-ceedings 10th International Conference on Image Analysis and Processing , 1999, pp. 394–399. [11] Mauricio Delbracio and Peyman Milanfar, “Inver-sion by direct iteration: An alternative to denoising diffusion for image restoration,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11435 , 2023. [12] Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie, “A convnet for the 2020s,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pat-tern recognition , 2022, pp. 11976–11986. [13] Eirikur Agustsson and Radu Timofte, “Ntire 2017 challenge on single image super-resolution: Dataset and study,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops , July 2017. [14] Lingshun Kong, Jiangxin Dong, Jianjun Ge, Mingqiang Li, and Jinshan Pan, “Efficient frequency domain-based transformers for high-quality image deblurring,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2023, pp. 5886–5895. [15] Syed Waqas Zamir, Aditya Arora, Salman Khan, Munawar Hayat, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Ming-Hsuan Yang, “Restormer: Efficient transformer for high-resolution image restoration,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2022, pp. 5728–5739. [16] Bin Xia, Yulun Zhang, Shiyin Wang, Yitong Wang, Xinglong Wu, Yapeng Tian, Wenming Yang, and Luc Van Gool, “Diffir: Efficient diffusion model for image restoration,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , 2023, pp. 13095–13105. [17] Zheng Chen, Yulun Zhang, Ding Liu, Jinjin Gu, Linghe Kong, Xin Yuan, et al., “Hierarchical inte-gration diffusion model for realistic image deblur-ring,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 36, pp. 29114–29125, 2023.