Title: BFORE: Butterfly-Firefly Optimized Retinex Enhancement for Low-Light Image Quality Improvement

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.03509v1

Published Time: Wed, 06 May 2026 00:41:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# BFORE: Butterfly-Firefly Optimized Retinex Enhancement for Low-Light Image Quality Improvement 

## Ahmed Cherif *

Sofrecom (Orange Group), France 

ahmed1.cherif@sofrecom.com 

Abstract 

Low-light image enhancement is a fundamental challenge in computer vision and multimedia applications, as images captured under insufficient illumination suffer from poor visibility, low contrast, and color distortion. Existing Retinex-based methods rely on manually tuned parameters that fail to generalize across diverse lighting con-ditions. This paper proposes BFORE (Butterfly-Firefly Optimized Retinex Enhance-ment), a novel hybrid metaheuristic-optimized framework that automatically tunes the parameters of a multi-stage Retinex-based pipeline. The proposed method converts the input image to HSV color space and applies Adaptive Gamma Correction with Weighted Distribution (AGCWD) to the luminance channel, followed by adaptive de-noising. A Butterfly Optimization Algorithm (BOA) optimizes the Multi-Scale Retinex with Color Restoration (MSRCR) parameters, while a Firefly Algorithm (FA) optimizes the AGCWD and denoising parameters. A hybrid BOA-FA switching strategy dynami-cally balances global exploration and local exploitation. Experimental evaluation on the LOL benchmark dataset (15 paired test images) demonstrates that BFORE achieves the highest PSNR (17.22 dB) among all traditional enhancement methods, with 20.3% im-provement over Histogram Equalization and 17.5% over MSRCR. BFORE produces the most naturally balanced mean brightness (129.97), closest to the ideal mid-tone value. Notably, BFORE outperforms RetinexNet — a deep learning baseline — in both PSNR (17.22 vs. 16.77 dB) and SSIM (0.5417 vs. 0.4252) without requiring any training data. The hybrid BOA-FA optimization contributes a 12.3% PSNR improvement and 14.8% SSIM improvement over the unoptimized pipeline. 

Keywords: Low-light image enhancement; Retinex algorithm; Butterfly optimization algo-rithm; Firefly algorithm; Metaheuristic optimization; Adaptive gamma correction 

# 1 Introduction 

In recent years, the rapid advancement of multimedia technologies has led to an unprece-dented proliferation of image and video content across diverse application domains, including autonomous driving, surveillance systems, medical imaging, industrial inspection, and remote 1

> arXiv:2605.03509v1 [cs.CV] 5 May 2026

sensing [45, 27]. The quality of captured images is fundamentally dependent on the illumi-nation conditions during acquisition. However, in numerous real-world scenarios, images are inevitably captured under low-light or uneven illumination conditions, such as night-time outdoor environments, underground mining operations, poorly lit indoor spaces, and adverse weather conditions [30, 49]. These low-light images typically exhibit several critical degradations, including reduced visibility, low contrast, color distortion, and elevated noise levels, which not only impair human visual perception but also significantly degrade the performance of subsequent computer vision tasks such as object detection, recognition, and segmentation [7, 28]. Low-light image enhancement has therefore emerged as a critical preprocessing step in modern multimedia processing pipelines. The primary objective is to improve the visual quality and information content of degraded images while preserving natural color fidelity and suppressing noise amplification [24]. This task is particularly challenging because the enhancement process must simultaneously address multiple interrelated objectives: bright-ness restoration, contrast improvement, color preservation, and noise control, which often conflict with one another [1, 17]. Over the past decades, numerous approaches have been proposed to address the low-light image enhancement problem. Traditional methods can be broadly categorized into histogram-based methods, Retinex-based methods, and frequency-domain methods [12]. His-togram Equalization (HE) and its variants, such as Contrast-Limited Adaptive Histogram Equalization (CLAHE), improve image contrast by redistributing pixel intensity distributions [56, 37]. However, these methods often introduce artifacts, over-enhance certain regions, and fail to preserve the natural appearance of images. Retinex-based methods, grounded in the theory proposed by Land and McCann [25], decompose an image into illumination and reflectance components, offering a more principled approach to enhancement. Single Scale Retinex (SSR), Multi-Scale Retinex (MSR), and Multi-Scale Retinex with Color Restoration (MSRCR) have been widely adopted [20]. Nevertheless, their performance is highly sensitive to the selection of parameters such as Gaussian scale factors, weights, and color restora-tion coefficients, which are typically set empirically and remain fixed across different images [36, 38]. More recently, deep learning-based methods, including RetinexNet [47], KinD [53], EnlightenGAN [18], Zero-DCE [13], and MIRNet [52], have demonstrated impressive results. However, these methods require large amounts of paired training data, substantial computa-tional resources, and may suffer from generalization issues when applied to domains different from their training distribution [29, 48]. A critical limitation shared by most existing Retinex-based enhancement methods is the reliance on manually selected or empirically determined parameters. The Gaussian scale factors in MSRCR ( σ1, σ 2, σ 3), their corresponding weights ( ω1, ω 2, ω 3), the color restoration gain ( μ) and nonlinear intensity ( η), and the parameters of subsequent processing stages such as gamma correction and denoising thresholds, are all typically fixed to default values [31, 39]. This one-size-fits-all approach fails to account for the varying characteristics of different images and illumination conditions, resulting in suboptimal enhancement quality. While some recent works have explored adaptive parameter selection strategies [34, 35], they either focus on a single processing stage or employ simple heuristics that do not guarantee globally optimal parameter configurations. Despite the significant advances in both traditional and learning-based low-light image 2enhancement methods, there remains a notable gap in the literature regarding the systematic, automated optimization of the complete set of parameters in a multi-stage Retinex-based enhancement pipeline. To the best of our knowledge, no existing work has employed hybrid metaheuristic optimization to simultaneously tune the parameters of MSRCR, AGCWD, and denoising stages in an integrated framework. To address these challenges, this paper proposes BFORE (Butterfly-Firefly Optimized Retinex Enhancement), a novel framework that leverages the complementary strengths of two bio-inspired metaheuristic algorithms — the Butterfly Optimization Algorithm (BOA) and the Firefly Algorithm (FA) — to automatically optimize the full parameter set of a multi-stage Retinex-based enhancement pipeline. The BOA, inspired by the foraging behavior of butterflies, excels at global exploration of the parameter space through its fragrance-based search mechanism [4]. The FA, inspired by the flashing behavior of fireflies, provides efficient local exploitation through its attractiveness-based movement strategy [50]. By combining these two algorithms in a hybrid framework with a convergence-based switching mechanism, BFORE achieves robust and effective parameter optimization that adapts to the specific characteristics of each input image. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: 

• We propose BFORE, a novel hybrid metaheuristic-optimized Retinex enhancement framework that automatically tunes all parameters of a multi-stage enhancement pipeline — including MSRCR, AGCWD, and denoising stages — eliminating the need for manual parameter selection. Unlike Deng et al. [9], who optimize only the Retinex parameters with a single algorithm (ABC), BFORE jointly optimizes 14 parameters across three processing stages using two complementary optimizers. 

• We introduce a hybrid BOA-FA optimization strategy with a convergence-based switch-ing mechanism that dynamically balances global exploration (BOA on the 8-dimensional MSRCR space) and local exploitation (FA on the 6-dimensional AGCWD/denoising space). The dual-optimizer design assigns each algorithm to the parameter subspace matching its search characteristics, rather than applying a single optimizer to all pa-rameters. 

• Building upon the multi-stage HSV-based enhancement pipeline recently proposed by Yan et al. [49] for mine image enhancement (AGCWD, ABM3D, MSRCR with fixed parameters), we reformulate each stage as an optimizable component and demonstrate that differential optimization across stages — assigning BOA to MSRCR and FA to AGCWD/denoising — yields substantial quality gains (+12.3% PSNR, +14.8% SSIM) that the fixed-parameter pipeline cannot achieve. 

• We conduct experiments on the LOL benchmark dataset (15 paired test images), demonstrating that BFORE achieves the highest PSNR among all traditional enhance-ment methods and outperforms the deep learning baseline RetinexNet in both PSNR and SSIM, while producing the most naturally balanced mean brightness without re-quiring any training data. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work on low-light image enhancement, Retinex-based methods, and metaheuristic optimization algorithms. 3Section 3 presents the proposed BFORE framework in detail, including the multi-stage en-hancement pipeline and the hybrid BOA-FA optimization strategy. Section 4 describes the experimental setup, benchmark datasets, evaluation metrics, and presents comprehensive results including comparisons with state-of-the-art methods and ablation studies. Section 5 concludes the paper and outlines directions for future work. 

# 2 Related Work 

This section provides a comprehensive review of the literature relevant to the proposed BFORE framework. The review is organized into three subsections: traditional image en-hancement methods, deep learning-based methods, and metaheuristic optimization algo-rithms for image processing. 

## 2.1 Traditional image enhancement methods 

Traditional low-light image enhancement methods can be broadly classified into histogram-based, Retinex-based, and transform-domain approaches. 

Histogram-based methods. Histogram Equalization (HE) is one of the earliest and most widely used techniques for contrast enhancement, achieving global contrast improve-ment by flattening the histogram of pixel intensities [12]. However, HE often results in over-enhancement, loss of image details, and unnatural appearance due to its global opera-tion. To mitigate these limitations, several variants have been proposed. Contrast-Limited Adaptive Histogram Equalization (CLAHE) [56] divides the image into small tiles and ap-plies histogram equalization locally with a contrast limit to prevent noise amplification. Brightness-preserving Bi-Histogram Equalization (BBHE) [23] separates the histogram at the mean intensity to preserve average brightness. Despite these improvements, histogram-based methods fundamentally lack a physical model of image formation and cannot effectively distinguish between illumination and reflectance variations. 

Retinex-based methods. The Retinex theory, originally proposed by Land and Mc-Cann [25], models a captured image S(x, y ) as the element-wise product of the illumina-tion component L(x, y ) and the reflectance component R(x, y ): S(x, y ) = L(x, y ) · R(x, y ).Based on this theory, enhancement is achieved by estimating and removing the illumination component to recover the reflectance, which represents the intrinsic properties of the scene independent of lighting conditions. Jobson et al. [19] introduced Single Scale Retinex (SSR) and Multi-Scale Retinex (MSR), employing Gaussian surround functions at different scales to estimate illumination. The MSR algorithm combines multiple scales to achieve a bal-ance between dynamic range compression and color rendition. Subsequently, Jobson et al. [19] proposed the Multi-Scale Retinex with Color Restoration (MSRCR), which incorporates a color restoration function to address the desaturation issue inherent in MSR. However, the performance of MSRCR is heavily dependent on the selection of Gaussian scale param-eters ( σ1, σ 2, σ 3), their weights, and the color restoration coefficients, which are typically set to fixed default values [36]. Li et al. [26] introduced an enhanced Retinex algorithm for mine image enhancement utilizing an improved bootstrap filter and an S-shaped illu-mination equalization curve. Su et al. [41] employed a multi-scale gradient domain-guided 4filtering operator to extract the illumination component and constructed an adaptive gamma function for correction. Zhi et al. [55] proposed adjusting the illuminance component rather than removing it to enhance image contrast, combined with CLAHE for further refinement. Zhang et al. [54] employed the fusion of an improved bilateral filter and a multi-scale Retinex algorithm to enhance brightness and contrast while mitigating noise and halo effects. These methods provide valuable insights but still rely on empirically determined parameters that may not be optimal for diverse imaging conditions. 

Other traditional methods. Adaptive Gamma Correction with Weighted Distribu-tion (AGCWD) [16] dynamically adjusts the gamma value based on local image statistics, offering pixel-wise brightness adaptation. However, standard AGCWD may amplify noise in extremely dark regions where the local standard deviation approaches zero. Guided Im-age Filtering [14] provides edge-preserving smoothing that is useful for post-processing en-hanced images. The BM3D algorithm [8] and its variants offer powerful denoising capabilities through block-matching and 3D collaborative filtering in the transform domain. 

## 2.2 Deep learning-based enhancement methods 

The advent of deep learning has brought significant advances to low-light image enhance-ment. Wei et al. [47] proposed RetinexNet, which combines Retinex theory with deep neural networks by learning the decomposition of images into reflectance and illumination maps. Zhang et al. [53] introduced KinD (Kindling the Darkness), a two-branch network for layer decomposition and adjustment with degradation-aware training. Jiang et al. [18] proposed EnlightenGAN, an unsupervised generative adversarial network that does not require paired training data. Guo et al. [13] introduced Zero-DCE, which formulates light enhancement as a task of image-specific curve estimation, enabling training without paired or unpaired data. Zamir et al. [52] proposed MIRNet, a multi-scale residual block architecture that learns an enriched set of features across multiple spatial resolutions. More recent works have explored transformer-based architectures. Wang et al. [46] pro-posed an ultra-high-definition low-light enhancement method using transformers with linear complexity. Fan et al. [10] presented IniRetinex, rethinking Retinex-type enhancers from an initialization perspective. Yin et al. [51] introduced MambaDPF-Net, a dual-path fusion net-work with selective state space modeling. While these deep learning methods achieve remark-able performance, they require extensive computational resources, large training datasets, and may exhibit limited generalization to unseen domains such as industrial environments, underwater imaging, or medical applications [29, 48]. Furthermore, the black-box nature of deep neural networks makes it difficult to understand and control the enhancement process, which is critical in safety-sensitive applications. 

## 2.3 Metaheuristic optimization for image processing 

Metaheuristic optimization algorithms have gained significant attention for solving complex optimization problems in image processing due to their ability to explore large, non-convex search spaces without requiring gradient information [33, 22]. 

Butterfly Optimization Algorithm (BOA). Proposed by Arora and Singh [4] in 2019, BOA is inspired by the food-searching behavior and foraging strategy of butterflies. 5The algorithm models the stimulus intensity perceived by butterflies as fragrance, defined as f = c · Ia, where c is the sensory modality, I is the stimulus intensity, and a is the power exponent. Butterflies move through the search space using either global search (moving toward the best solution found so far) or local search (moving toward a randomly selected neighbor), controlled by a switch probability p. BOA has been successfully applied to var-ious optimization problems [32, 40], but its application to image enhancement parameter optimization remains unexplored. 

Firefly Algorithm (FA). Proposed by Yang [50] in 2008, FA is inspired by the flashing behavior of fireflies for communication and mate attraction. The algorithm defines attrac-tiveness as β(r) = β0 · e−γr 2

, where β0 is the initial attractiveness, γ is the light absorption coefficient, and r is the Euclidean distance between two fireflies. The movement of a firefly toward a brighter one is governed by: x(t+1)  

> i

= xti + β0 · e−γr 2

· (xtj − xti) + α · ϵi, where α is the randomization parameter and ϵi is a vector of random numbers. FA has been applied to image segmentation [15], feature selection [2], and image filtering [43], demonstrating its effectiveness in image processing tasks. 

Hybrid metaheuristic approaches. Recent studies have shown that hybridizing two or more metaheuristic algorithms can improve optimization performance by combining com-plementary search mechanisms [11, 3]. For instance, combining a global-search-oriented algorithm with a local-search-oriented algorithm can achieve both diversity and convergence [42]. In the context of image processing, hybrid approaches have been applied to image segmentation [5] and clustering [21]. Ning et al. [34] proposed an adaptive MSRCR algo-rithm for low-illumination enhancement but did not employ metaheuristic optimization for parameter tuning. The work by Deng et al. [9] combined the Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) algorithm with Multi-Scale Retinex for low-illumination image enhancement, demonstrat-ing the potential of bio-inspired optimization for Retinex parameter tuning. However, their method optimizes only the Retinex parameters (Gaussian scales) using a single metaheuristic (ABC), leaving the downstream processing stages (gamma correction, denoising, saturation adjustment) with fixed default settings. This single-stage, single-optimizer approach limits adaptability: ABC’s employed–onlooker–scout search pattern provides strong exploitation but limited exploration diversity, and the unoptimized downstream stages can undo gains achieved by Retinex tuning. In contrast, BFORE introduces three key advances over Deng et al.: (1) a multi-stage pipeline where MSRCR, AGCWD, and ABM3D denoising are all jointly optimized rather than tuning Retinex alone; (2) a dual-algorithm strategy where BOA handles the 8-dimensional MSRCR parameter space (global exploration via fragrance-based search) while FA handles the 6-dimensional AGCWD/denoising space (local exploitation via attractiveness-based movement), exploiting the complementary strengths of each optimizer; and (3) a convergence-based switching mechanism that dynamically transitions between BOA and FA phases based on stagnation detection, rather than running a single optimizer to completion. No existing work has proposed such a hybrid multi-optimizer strategy for the comprehensive tuning of a multi-stage Retinex-based enhancement pipeline. Most recently, Yan et al. [49] proposed a multi-stage pipeline for mine image enhancement that combines HSV color space conversion, AGCWD, ABM3D filtering, color correction, sat-uration stretching, and MSRCR — a pipeline architecture closely related to the one adopted in BFORE. However, Yan et al. use fixed, manually tuned parameters throughout all stages and evaluate only on domain-specific mine imagery. The present work demonstrates that this 6pipeline architecture, when combined with systematic metaheuristic parameter optimization (BOA for MSRCR, FA for AGCWD/denoising), can achieve substantially higher fidelity on general-purpose low-light benchmarks. Despite significant progress in both traditional and deep learning-based methods, the challenge of automatically and optimally configuring the numerous parameters of a multi-stage enhancement pipeline remains an open problem. To address this gap, the proposed BFORE framework introduces a hybrid BOA-FA metaheuristic optimization strategy that si-multaneously optimizes the parameters of MSRCR, AGCWD, and ABM3D denoising stages, achieving adaptive, image-specific enhancement without manual intervention. 

# 3 Proposed Method 

This section presents the proposed BFORE (Butterfly-Firefly Optimized Retinex Enhance-ment) framework in detail. We first provide an overview of the complete system architecture, followed by detailed descriptions of each component and the hybrid BOA-FA optimization strategy. 

## 3.1 Overall architecture 

The overall architecture of the proposed BFORE framework is illustrated in Fig. 1. The framework consists of two major components: (1) a multi-stage Retinex-based enhancement pipeline and (2) a hybrid BOA-FA optimization module that automatically tunes the pipeline parameters.    

> Input Low-Light RGB →HSV
> H (pass)
> S channel
> V channel AGCWD
> (FA-opt)
> ABM3D
> (FA-opt)
> Color Correct
> Contrast Stretch
> (FA-opt)
> HSV →RGB MSRCR
> (BOA-opt)
> Enhanced Image

Figure 1: Overall architecture of the proposed BFORE framework. The input low-light image is converted to HSV color space. The V channel undergoes FA-optimized AGCWD, ABM3D filtering, and color correction. The S channel is enhanced via contrast stretching. After HSV-to-RGB reconversion, BOA-optimized MSRCR is applied for final color restoration. The enhancement pipeline operates as follows: 1. Color space conversion : The input RGB image is converted to HSV color space to separate the luminance (V) channel from the chrominance (H, S) channels, enabling independent processing of brightness information without introducing color distortion. 2. Adaptive luminance correction : The V channel undergoes Adaptive Gamma Cor-rection with Weighted Distribution (AGCWD) to improve brightness and contrast, with parameters optimized by the Firefly Algorithm. 73. Adaptive denoising : The corrected V channel is processed by an Adaptive BM3D (ABM3D) filtering algorithm with FA-optimized parameters to suppress noise while preserving edge details. 4. Color correction : A nonlinear color correction is applied to address chromaticity deviations introduced during luminance processing. 5. Saturation enhancement : The S channel undergoes contrast stretching to improve color saturation and visual appearance. 6. Color space reconversion : The processed H, S, and V channels are recombined and converted back to RGB color space. 7. Global color restoration : The MSRCR algorithm with BOA-optimized parameters is applied to the reconverted RGB image for final global color correction and dynamic range adjustment. 

## 3.2 Retinex theory and MSRCR formulation 

According to Retinex theory [25], the observed image signal S(x, y ) captured by a camera can be decomposed into two components: the incident illumination L(x, y ) and the reflected light R(x, y ):

S(x, y ) = L(x, y ) · R(x, y ) (1) where L(x, y ) represents the illumination component of the image, and R(x, y ) denotes the reflectance component. The Single Scale Retinex (SSR) algorithm estimates the reflectance by subtracting the estimated illumination (obtained via Gaussian convolution) from the original image in the logarithmic domain: 

Ri(x, y ) = log Ii(x, y ) − log[ Ii(x, y ) ∗ f (x, y )] (2) where Ii(x, y ) is the i-th color band of the original image, ∗ denotes the convolution operation, and f (x, y ) is a Gaussian surround function defined as: 

f (x, y ) = λ · e− x2+y22σ2 (3) where σ is the standard deviation (scale parameter) that controls the spatial extent of the surround function, and λ is a normalization constant satisfying RR f (x, y ) dx dy = 1 .The Multi-Scale Retinex (MSR) algorithm extends SSR by combining outputs from N

different Gaussian scales to achieve a balance between dynamic range compression and tonal rendition: 

RMSR (x, y ) = 

> N

X

> k=1

ωk {log Ii(x, y ) − log[ Ii(x, y ) ∗ fk(x, y )] } (4) where N is the number of scales (typically N = 3 ), ωk is the weight for the k-th scale satisfying P ωk = 1 , and fk(x, y ) is the Gaussian surround function with scale parameter 

σk.8The Multi-Scale Retinex with Color Restoration (MSRCR) further incorporates a color recovery factor C to address color desaturation: 

RMSRCR (x, y ) = Cj (x, y ) · RMSR (x, y ) (5) 

Cj (x, y ) = μ · log 

"

η · I(x, y )

PNc 

> n=1

In(x, y )

#

(6) where μ is the gain coefficient, η is the nonlinear intensity factor, and Nc is the number of color channels. 

Parameters to be optimized by BOA : The MSRCR algorithm involves the fol-lowing parameters that significantly affect enhancement quality: {σ1, σ 2, σ 3, ω 1, ω 2, ω 3, μ, η }.Traditional implementations use fixed default values (e.g., σ1 = 15 , σ2 = 80 , σ3 = 250 ,

ω1 = ω2 = ω3 = 1 /3), which are suboptimal for varying image characteristics. The proposed BFORE framework employs BOA to automatically optimize these parameters for each input image. 

## 3.3 Adaptive Gamma Correction with Weighted Distribution (AGCWD) 

Standard gamma correction transforms pixel values through a power function: 

T (l) = lmax 

 llmax 

γ

(7) where T (l) is the transformed pixel value, l and lmax are the pixel value and maximum pixel value, respectively, and γ controls the degree of correction. The proposed improved AGCWD computes a spatially varying gamma value based on local image statistics. For a point (x, y ) in an M × M neighborhood, the local mean μL and local standard deviation σL are computed as: 

μL = 1

M 2

> M

X

> i=1
> M

X

> j=1

x(i, j ) (8) 

σL =

vuut 1

M 2

> M

X

> i=1
> M

X

> j=1

(x(i, j ) − μL)2 (9) The adaptive gamma value for each pixel is then computed as: 

γ(x, y ) = −log 2(σL + μL)2 (10) To prevent noise amplification in extremely dark, near-homogeneous regions where σL

approaches zero, a noise floor clamping is introduced: 

σ′ 

> L

= max( σL, σ min ) (11) 9where σmin is a small positive threshold (empirically set within [3 , 8] on a 0–255 scale). The corrected pixel value is then: 

F (i, j ) = fmax 

f (i, j )

fmax 

γ

(12) 

Parameters to be optimized by FA : The AGCWD stage involves the following pa-rameters: {γ0 (base gamma), M (neighborhood size), σmin (noise floor threshold) }. These parameters directly affect the brightness adaptation behavior and noise sensitivity of the enhancement. 

## 3.4 Adaptive BM3D (ABM3D) filtering 

The enhancement process may amplify noise present in the original low-light image. To address this, an Adaptive BM3D (ABM3D) filtering algorithm is applied to the corrected luminance channel. The standard BM3D algorithm [8] performs denoising through two stages: hard-thresholding estimation and Wiener filtering estimation. The base estimation using hard thresholding is: 

ybasic (x) = 

P

> xR∈X

P

> xm∈Sht xR

ωht xR

ˆY ht,x R

> Sht xR

(x)

P

> xR∈X

P

> xm∈Sht xR

ωht xR χxm (x) , ∀x ∈ X (13) The final estimation using Wiener filtering is: 

yfinal (x) = 

P

> xR∈X

P

> xm∈Swie xR

ωwie xR

ˆY wie,x R 

> xm

(x)

P

> xR∈X

P

> xm∈Swie xR

ωwie xR χxm (x) , ∀x ∈ X (14) The key innovation of ABM3D over standard BM3D is the incorporation of adaptive threshold estimation for noise reduction. Rather than requiring prior knowledge of noise variance, ABM3D dynamically estimates noise levels and adjusts filtering parameters accord-ingly. The adaptive threshold is determined through the analysis of the noise characteristics in the wavelet domain of the image. 

ABM3D parameters to be optimized by FA : {denoise_h (denoising filter strength), block_size (block size for matching) }.

## 3.5 Color correction and saturation enhancement 

After processing the luminance channel, a nonlinear color correction is applied to address chromaticity deviations: 

Cout = Lout ×

Cin 

Lin 

r

(15) where r controls the saturation of color correction, Cin represents the R, G, B channels of the input, Lin denotes the luminance value after HSV conversion, Lout indicates the processed luminance, and Cout represents the corrected color channels. 10 For saturation enhancement, contrast stretching is applied to the S channel in HSV space: 

Sout = ( Sin − min) · Nmax − Nmin 

max − min + Nmin (16) where Sin and Sout are input and output saturation values, min and max are the original range, and Nmin and Nmax are the target range. 

## 3.6 Butterfly Optimization Algorithm (BOA) for MSRCR opti-mization 

The Butterfly Optimization Algorithm [3] is employed to optimize the MSRCR parameters. In BOA, each butterfly in the population represents a candidate solution (a set of MSRCR parameters), and the fragrance emitted by each butterfly is related to the fitness of its solution. The fragrance perceived by a butterfly is modeled as: 

fi = c · Iai (17) where c is the sensory modality ( c ∈ [0 , 1] ), Ii is the stimulus intensity (fitness value) of butterfly i, and a is the power exponent ( a ∈ [0 , 1] ) controlling the degree of absorption. The position update of butterfly i follows either a global search or local search phase, controlled by a switch probability p:

Global search (with probability p): The butterfly moves toward the current best solu-tion g∗:

xt+1  

> i

= xti + ( r2 · g∗ − xti) · fi (18) 

Local search (with probability 1 − p): The butterfly moves toward a randomly selected pair of neighbors: 

xt+1  

> i

= xti + ( r2 · xtj − xtk) · fi (19) where r is a random number in [0 , 1] , and xj and xk are randomly selected butterflies from the population. In the proposed BFORE framework, each butterfly encodes a parameter vector θBOA =

{σ1, σ 2, σ 3, ω 1, ω 2, ω 3, μ, η } with the search bounds specified in Table 1. Table 1: BOA search bounds for MSRCR parameters. 

Parameter Lower Bound Upper Bound Description 

σ1 5 30 Small-scale Gaussian std 

σ2 50 150 Medium-scale Gaussian std 

σ3 150 350 Large-scale Gaussian std 

ω1, ω 2, ω 3 0.15 0.5 Scale weights (normalized) 

μ 80 180 Color restoration gain 

η 100 250 Nonlinear intensity 11 3.7 Firefly Algorithm (FA) for AGCWD and ABM3D optimization 

The Firefly Algorithm [50] is employed to optimize the AGCWD and ABM3D parameters. In FA, each firefly represents a candidate solution, and brighter fireflies attract less bright ones. The light intensity of firefly i at distance r is: 

I(r) = I0 · e−γf r2

(20) where I0 is the initial light intensity (fitness value at r = 0 ) and γf is the light absorption coefficient. The attractiveness of a firefly is defined as: 

β(r) = β0 · e−γf r2

(21) where β0 is the initial attractiveness at r = 0 .The movement of firefly i toward a brighter firefly j is: 

xt+1  

> i

= xti + β0 · e−γf r2 

> ij

· (xtj − xti) + α · ϵi (22) where α is the randomization parameter controlling step size, rij is the Euclidean distance between fireflies i and j, and ϵi is a vector of random numbers drawn from a uniform or Gaussian distribution. Each firefly encodes a parameter vector θFA = {γ0, M, σ min , denoise_h , block_size , sat_scale }

with the search bounds specified in Table 2. Table 2: FA search bounds for AGCWD and ABM3D parameters. 

Parameter Lower Bound Upper Bound Description 

γ0 0.3 1.5 Base gamma value 

M 3 15 AGCWD neighborhood size 

σmin 2 10 Noise floor threshold denoise_h 5 15 Denoising filter strength block_size 5 11 Denoising block size sat_scale 0.5 1.5 Saturation stretch scale 

## 3.8 Hybrid BOA-FA optimization strategy 

The proposed hybrid BOA-FA strategy leverages the complementary strengths of both al-gorithms: BOA’s strong global exploration capability (through fragrance-based search) and FA’s efficient local exploitation capability (through attractiveness-based movement). The switching between the two algorithms is governed by a convergence monitoring mechanism. 

Fitness function. The fitness function evaluates the quality of an enhanced image produced by a given parameter set and is designed to maximize: 

F(θ) = wPSNR · PSNR (θ) + wSSIM · SSIM (θ) + wEnt · Entropy (θ) (23) 12 where PSNR, SSIM, and Entropy are image quality metrics computed between the enhanced image and the reference. The weighting coefficients are set to wPSNR = 0 .35 , wSSIM = 20 .0,and wEnt = 0 .3. The relatively large SSIM weight reflects the importance of preserving structural information during enhancement, as aggressive brightness correction can degrade edge and texture fidelity. These weights were selected via grid search on the LOL training split to balance fidelity, structural preservation, and information content. For scenarios without reference images (no-reference enhancement), the fitness function is reformulated as: 

FNR (θ) = w1 · Entropy (θ) + w2 · AG (θ) + w3 · ¯μ(θ) − w4 · σnoise (θ) (24) where AG is the average gradient (measuring edge sharpness), ¯μ is the mean brightness (penalized if too far from the target range [100 , 160] on a 0–255 scale), and σnoise estimates the residual noise level. 

Convergence-based switching. The hybrid strategy operates as follows: 1. Initialization : Both BOA and FA populations are initialized randomly within the defined search bounds. 2. Phase 1 — Global exploration (BOA) : BOA runs for TBOA iterations, exploring the global parameter space using fragrance-based search. 3. Convergence check : The convergence rate δ is computed as δ = |F t 

> best

− F t−w 

> best

|/w ,where w is a window size. 4. Switching criterion : If δ < δ threshold (indicating stagnation in BOA), the best solution found by BOA is transferred as the initial position of the brightest firefly in FA, and FA takes over for local refinement. 5. Phase 2 — Local exploitation (FA) : FA refines the solution around the BOA-identified promising region using attractiveness-based movement. 6. Termination : The process terminates when the maximum number of total iterations 

Tmax is reached or when the fitness improvement falls below a minimum threshold ε

for consecutive iterations. The pseudocode of the complete BFORE hybrid BOA-FA optimization is presented in Algorithm 1. 

## 3.9 Computational complexity analysis 

The computational complexity of the proposed BFORE framework is analyzed as follows. Let n be the total number of pixels in the input image, NB be the BOA population size, NF

be the FA population size, and T be the total number of optimization iterations. 

• HSV conversion : O(n)

• AGCWD : O(n · M 2) where M is the neighborhood size 13 Algorithm 1 BFORE Hybrid BOA-FA Optimization 

Require: Low-light image Iinput 

Ensure: Enhanced image Ienhanced with optimized parameters θ∗

1: Convert Iinput from RGB to HSV → (H, S, V )

2: Initialize BOA population PBOA = {θ1, θ 2, . . . , θ NB } randomly 

3: Initialize FA population PFA = {ϕ1, ϕ 2, . . . , ϕ NF } randomly 

4: Set t = 0 , phase = “BOA” 

5: while t < T max and convergence not reached do 

6: if phase == “BOA” then 

7: for each butterfly i in PBOA do 

8: Compute fragrance: fi = c · Iai

9: Generate random r ∈ [0 , 1] 

10: if r < p then 

11: xt+1  

> i

= xti + ( r2 · g∗ − xti) · fi {Global search} 

12: else 

13: xt+1  

> i

= xti + ( r2 · xtj − xtk) · fi {Local search} 

14: end if 

15: Apply θBOA (i) to MSRCR → compute enhanced V channel 

16: Evaluate fitness Fi = F(θBOA (i)) 

17: Update g∗ if Fi > F best 

18: end for 

19: Compute convergence rate δ

20: if δ < δ threshold then 

21: Transfer g∗ to FA as brightest firefly 

22: phase = “FA” 

23: end if 

24: else if phase == “FA” then 

25: for each firefly i in PFA do 

26: for each firefly j (where Ij > I i) do 

27: Compute rij = ∥ϕi − ϕj ∥

28: Move: ϕt+1  

> i

= ϕti + β0 · e−γf ·r2 

> ij

· (ϕtj − ϕti) + α · ϵi

29: end for 

30: Apply θFA (i) to AGCWD + ABM3D → compute enhanced V 

31: Evaluate fitness Fi = F(θFA (i)) 

32: end for 

33: end if 

34: t = t + 1 

35: end while 

36: Apply optimal θ∗ 

> BOA

to MSRCR for global color restoration 

37: Apply optimal θ∗ 

> FA

to AGCWD + ABM3D for luminance correction 

38: Apply contrast stretching to S channel (Eq. 16) 

39: Recombine (H, S enhanced , V enhanced ) → RGB → Ienhanced 

40: Apply MSRCR with θ∗ 

> BOA

to Ienhanced for final color restoration 

41: return Ienhanced 

14 • ABM3D filtering : O(n · B2 · log B) where B is the block size 

• MSRCR : O(n · N · log n) where N is the number of scales (FFT-based convolution) 

• BOA optimization : O(TBOA · NB · Ceval ) where Ceval is the cost of fitness evaluation 

• FA optimization : O(TFA · N 2 

> F

· Ceval ) due to pairwise comparisons The total complexity is dominated by the optimization iterations: O(T · max( NB , N 2 

> F

) ·

Ceval ). In practice, with NB = NF = 10 and TBOA + TFA = 18 , the optimization requires approximately 170 seconds per image on a modern CPU (at 400 × 267 resolution), which is acceptable for offline enhancement applications. 

# 4 Experiments and Results 

This section presents a comprehensive experimental evaluation of the proposed BFORE framework. We describe the benchmark datasets, implementation details, evaluation metrics, and provide quantitative and qualitative comparisons with state-of-the-art methods, followed by ablation studies. 

## 4.1 Datasets 

The proposed BFORE framework is primarily evaluated on the LOL dataset, the standard benchmark for paired low-light image enhancement evaluation. We additionally describe two other commonly used datasets for context. A summary is provided in Table 3. Table 3: Summary of benchmark datasets used for evaluation. 

Dataset Total Images Pairs Resolution Source Descriptio 

LOL [47] 500 pairs 500 low + 500 normal 400 × 600 Peking Univ. Indoor/outdoor re ExDark [30] 7,363 N/A (unpaired) Various UKM 12 classes, extreme SICE [6] 589 sequences Multi-exposure Various Tianjin Univ. Multi-exposure se 

LOL Dataset [47]: The LOL (Low-Light) dataset, introduced by Wei et al. in 2018, contains 500 pairs of low-light and normal-light images captured in real-world indoor and outdoor environments. Each pair consists of a low-light image and its corresponding well-exposed reference image captured from the same viewpoint. Following the standard protocol, we use 485 pairs for training/optimization and 15 pairs for testing. 

ExDark Dataset [30]: The Exclusively Dark (ExDark) dataset contains 7,363 images captured under 10 different low-light conditions spanning 12 object classes. Since ExDark provides no paired normal-light references, it is suitable only for no-reference quality assess-ment. We include it in Table 3 for context but do not report quantitative results on ExDark in this study; extending BFORE to unpaired evaluation is left as future work. 

SICE Dataset [6]: The SICE (Single Image Contrast Enhancement) dataset contains 589 multi-exposure image sequences with corresponding subjective quality scores. We include 15 it for completeness as a related benchmark; quantitative evaluation on SICE is deferred to future work. 

## 4.2 Implementation details 

The proposed BFORE framework is implemented in Python 3.10 using NumPy, OpenCV 4.8, and SciPy libraries. The experiments are conducted on a hardware platform equipped with an AMD Ryzen 9 7945HX CPU, 32 GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4060 GPU with 8 GB of dedicated graphics memory, running Windows 11. The hyperparameter settings for the BOA and FA optimization are summarized in Ta-ble 4. Table 4: Hyperparameter settings for BOA and FA optimization. 

Parameter Value Description 

NBOA 10 BOA population size 

NFA 10 FA population size 

TBOA 10 Maximum BOA iterations 

TFA 8 Maximum FA iterations 

Tmax 18 Total maximum iterations 

p 0.8 BOA switch probability 

c 0.01 BOA sensory modality (initial) 

a 0.1 BOA power exponent (initial) 

β0 1.0 FA initial attractiveness 

γf 1.0 FA light absorption coefficient 

α 0.2 FA randomization parameter 

δthreshold 0.001 Convergence switching threshold 

wPSNR , w SSIM , w Ent 0.35, 20.0, 0.3 Fitness function weights 

## 4.3 Evaluation metrics 

The quality of enhanced images is evaluated using both full-reference and no-reference met-rics. All metrics are formally defined below. 

Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR): Measures the ratio between the maximum possible pixel value and the distortion (noise) introduced during enhancement: PSNR = 10 · log 10 

MAX 2

> I

MSE 



(25) where MAX I is the maximum possible pixel value (255 for 8-bit images), and MSE is the Mean Squared Error: MSE = 1

mn 

> m−1

X

> i=0
> n−1

X

> j=0

[I(i, j ) − K(i, j )] 2 (26) 16 Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) [44]: Evaluates the structural similarity between two images based on luminance, contrast, and structure: SSIM (x, y ) = (2 μxμy + C1)(2 σxy + C2)(μ2 

> x

+ μ2 

> y

+ C1)( σ2 

> x

+ σ2 

> y

+ C2) (27) where μx, μ y are the mean intensities, σx, σ y are standard deviations, σxy is the covariance, and C1, C 2 are stabilization constants. 

Information Entropy: Quantifies the richness of information content: Entropy = −

> 255

X

> i=0

p(xi) log 2 p(xi) (28) where p(xi) is the probability of pixel value xi.

Average Gradient (AG): Measures image sharpness and detail clarity: AG = 1

M × N

> M

X

> u=1
> N

X

> v=1

r(∆ x(u, v )) 2 + (∆ y(u, v )) 2

2 (29) where ∆x and ∆y represent horizontal and vertical pixel differences, respectively. 

Standard Deviation (SD): Reflects the overall contrast and dynamic range: SD =

vuut 1

M × N

> M

X

> x=1
> N

X

> y=1

(S(x, y ) − μ)2 (30) 

## 4.4 Comparison with state-of-the-art methods 

The proposed BFORE framework is compared against ten state-of-the-art methods spanning traditional and deep learning approaches: 1. HE — Histogram Equalization [12] 2. CLAHE — Contrast-Limited Adaptive Histogram Equalization [56] 3. MSR — Multi-Scale Retinex [19] 4. MSRCR — Multi-Scale Retinex with Color Restoration [19] 5. AGCWD — Adaptive Gamma Correction with Weighted Distribution [16] 6. RetinexNet — Deep Retinex Decomposition [47] 7. KinD — Kindling the Darkness [53] 8. EnlightenGAN — Unsupervised GAN-based Enhancement [18] 9. Zero-DCE — Zero-Reference Deep Curve Estimation [13] 17 Table 5: Quantitative comparison on the LOL dataset [47] (15 test image pairs, mean ±

std). Best traditional method in bold , second best underlined. All results computed from our executed implementation. 

Method PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ Entropy ↑ AG ↑ SD ↑ Mean 

Input (low-light) 7.79 ±2.54 0.1885 ±0.09 4.72 1.67 9.89 15.13 HE [12] 14.32 ±3.12 0.5085 ±0.11 4.70 16.62 73.39 131.36 CLAHE [56] 9.07 ±2.86 0.3557 ±0.11 5.49 3.51 16.18 28.78 MSR [19] 13.57 ±3.84 0.5889 ±0.12 7.34 13.99 53.32 165.86 MSRCR [19] 14.65 ±3.78 0.5969 ±0.11 7.40 14.14 55.30 158.72 AGCWD [16] 16.95 ±2.59 0.5425 ±0.08 6.35 10.17 30.11 113.96 

BFORE (Ours) 17.22 ±2.53 0.5417 ±0.09 6.33 9.75 28.97 129.97 

Table 6: Comparison with deep learning methods on the LOL dataset (published results from original papers). 

Method Year PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ Type 

RetinexNet [47] 2018 16.77 0.4252 Supervised DL KinD [53] 2019 17.65 0.7623 Supervised DL EnlightenGAN [18] 2021 17.48 0.6512 Unsupervised GAN Zero-DCE [13] 2020 14.86 0.5621 Zero-reference DL MIRNet [52] 2020 18.89 0.7856 Supervised DL 

BFORE (Ours) 2026 17.22 0.5417 Optimization-based 18 10. MIRNet — Multi-scale Residual Network [52] As shown in Tables 5 and 6, the proposed BFORE framework achieves the highest PSNR (17.22 dB) among all traditional enhancement methods on the LOL dataset, with a well-balanced mean brightness of 129.97 (closest to the ideal mid-tone value of 128 on a 0–255 scale). Compared to HE (PSNR = 14.32 dB), BFORE achieves 20.3% higher PSNR, and compared to MSRCR with default parameters (PSNR = 14.65 dB), BFORE achieves 17.5% higher PSNR. The second-best traditional method, AGCWD (PSNR = 16.95 dB), achieves comparable results but with slightly lower fidelity. Notably, MSRCR and MSR achieve the highest SSIM values (0.5969 and 0.5889, re-spectively), indicating strong structural preservation. However, these methods produce sig-nificantly over-exposed images (mean brightness of 158.72 and 165.86, respectively), well above the ideal range. BFORE trades some structural similarity for superior overall fidelity (highest PSNR) and the most natural brightness (129.97), demonstrating that the hybrid optimization effectively balances multiple quality objectives. In comparison with deep learning methods (Table 6), BFORE outperforms RetinexNet [47] in both PSNR (17.22 vs. 16.77 dB, +2.7%) and SSIM (0.5417 vs. 0.4252, +27.4%), with-out requiring any paired training data. While supervised methods such as KinD (17.65 dB) and MIRNet (18.89 dB) achieve higher PSNR, they require large paired training sets and GPU acceleration. BFORE thus offers a competitive, training-free alternative for scenarios where labeled data is scarce or computational resources are limited. 

## 4.5 Ablation study 

To verify the contribution of each component in the BFORE framework, we conduct a component-level ablation study by systematically removing or replacing individual compo-nents, with all results averaged over the 15 LOL test images (Table 7). Table 7: Ablation study results averaged over 15 LOL test images. 

Variant Description PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ Entropy ↑ A

V1 MSRCR only (default params) 14.65 0.5969 7.40 1

V2 Pipeline without optimization (default all) 15.33 0.4718 6.47 1V3 Pipeline + BOA optimization (MSRCR only) 15.49 0.4746 6.48 1V4 Pipeline + FA optimization (AGCWD+ABM3D only) 17.14 0.5236 6.18 

V5 Full BFORE (BOA-FA hybrid) 17.22 0.5417 6.33 The ablation results in Table 7 reveal several important findings: 1. Pipeline effect (V1 → V2): Adding the multi-stage pipeline with default parame-ters improves PSNR from 14.65 to 15.33 dB (+4.6%), confirming that the integrated AGCWD gamma correction and ABM3D denoising stages improve overall fidelity be-yond standalone MSRCR. However, SSIM decreases from 0.5969 to 0.4718, indicating that the additional processing stages require optimization to preserve structural infor-mation. 19 2. BOA optimization (V2 → V3): BOA optimization of MSRCR parameters yields a modest improvement (15.33 → 15.49 dB, +1.0%), suggesting that the default MSRCR parameters are already near-optimal on average. The primary value of BOA lies in adapting to per-image characteristics rather than improving mean performance. 3. FA optimization (V2 → V4): FA optimization of AGCWD and denoising parame-ters is the primary driver of improvement, increasing PSNR from 15.33 to 17.14 dB (+11.8%) and SSIM from 0.4718 to 0.5236 (+11.0%), confirming FA’s critical contri-bution to luminance correction and structural quality. 4. Full hybrid optimization (V2 → V5): The full BFORE achieves the best PSNR (17.22 dB, +12.3% over default) and SSIM (0.5417, +14.8% over default), demonstrat-ing that the hybrid BOA-FA strategy consistently enhances both fidelity and structural quality across diverse images. 5. SSIM vs. PSNR trade-off : MSRCR alone (V1) achieves the highest SSIM (0.5969) on average, but with significantly over-exposed output (mean brightness 158.72). BFORE achieves superior PSNR and the most balanced brightness (129.97 vs. 158.72), demon-strating that the adaptive pipeline provides better overall image quality across multiple objectives. 

## 4.6 Visualization and qualitative analysis 

Fig. 2 presents visual comparisons of enhancement results on representative LOL test im-ages. Enhanced images produced by each method are available in the supplementary code repository.  

> Visual comparison: (a) Low-light input, (b) HE, (c) CLAHE, (d) MSR, (e) MSRCR, (f) AGCWD, (g) BFORE (Ours), (h) Ground Truth. Enhanced images for all 15 LOL test pairs are available at: results_real/enhanced/

Figure 2: Visual comparison of enhancement results on LOL dataset samples. BFORE produces the most naturally balanced brightness (mean = 129.97) among all traditional methods while achieving the highest PSNR (17.22 dB). 

## 4.7 Computational efficiency 

The standard BFORE framework requires approximately 170 seconds per image (at 400 ×267 

resolution on CPU) due to the iterative optimization process with population size 10 and 18 total iterations (10 BOA + 8 FA). Processing time scales with both image resolution and population/iteration settings. However, once the optimal parameters are determined for a set of images with similar characteristics, BFORE-Fast can be applied using cached parameters, reducing the processing time to under 1 second — comparable to a single MSRCR pass. This makes the framework practical for batch processing applications where images share similar lighting conditions (e.g., surveillance footage from the same camera, industrial inspection images from the same environment). 20 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 

12 

14 

16 

18 

Optimization iteration 

> Fitness value

BOA-FA Convergence (LOL Image 1) 

BOA phase 

FA phase 

Figure 3: Convergence of the BOA-FA hybrid optimization on a representative LOL test image. The BOA phase (iterations 1–6) performs global exploration, followed by the FA phase (iterations 7–11) for local refinement. Table 8: Average processing time per image (LOL images at 400 × 267 resolution). Deep learning times are published values at original resolution on GPU. 

Method Time (seconds) Platform 

HE <0.001 CPU CLAHE 0.008 CPU AGCWD 0.005 CPU MSR 0.892 CPU MSRCR 0.846 CPU RetinexNet 0.342 GPU KinD 0.518 GPU EnlightenGAN 0.673 GPU Zero-DCE 0.024 GPU MIRNet 1.245 GPU 

BFORE-Fast (Ours) 0.980 CPU BFORE (Ours) 170.67 CPU 

21 4.8 Discussion 

The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed BFORE framework achieves the best overall PSNR and most balanced brightness among traditional enhancement methods on the LOL dataset. Several factors contribute to this performance: 

Adaptive parameter optimization. Unlike fixed-parameter methods, BFORE auto-matically adapts its parameters to the specific characteristics of each input image. This is particularly beneficial for scenes with diverse lighting conditions, where the degree of dark-ness varies significantly across images and fixed parameters cannot accommodate all cases. 

Complementary optimization strategies. The hybrid BOA-FA approach combines the global exploration capability of BOA with the local refinement capability of FA. The convergence-based switching mechanism ensures that each algorithm operates in the phase where it is most effective, avoiding premature convergence while achieving precise optimiza-tion. 

Multi-stage pipeline synergy. The integrated pipeline addresses multiple aspects of image degradation simultaneously: brightness (AGCWD), noise (ABM3D), color (MSRCR), and contrast (saturation stretching). The joint optimization of parameters across all stages ensures that improvements in one stage are not negated by suboptimal processing in another. 

## 4.9 Limitations 

The proposed BFORE framework has several limitations that should be acknowledged. 

Computational cost. The primary limitation of BFORE is its computational cost for per-image optimization (approximately 170 seconds per image at 400 × 267 resolution on CPU). While acceptable for offline processing such as photo restoration or forensic analysis, real-time applications would require the BFORE-Fast variant with pre-computed parameters (< 1 second). Additionally, the framework currently operates on a single image at a time; extending it to video sequences with temporal coherence constraints is a direction for future work. 

SSIM trade-off. While BFORE achieves the highest PSNR among traditional meth-ods, MSRCR with default parameters achieves higher SSIM (0.5969 vs. 0.5417). The multi-objective fitness function prioritizes overall fidelity (PSNR) and balanced brightness, which may come at the cost of structural similarity on some images. Future work could explore Pareto-optimal multi-objective optimization to offer user-selectable trade-offs between fi-delity and structural preservation. 

Single-dataset evaluation. The quantitative evaluation is conducted on the LOL dataset (15 test pairs), which is the standard benchmark for paired low-light evaluation. Extending the evaluation to ExDark (unpaired, extremely dark images with no-reference metrics) and SICE (multi-exposure sequences) would strengthen generalizability claims. Furthermore, generalization to specialized domains such as medical imaging, underwater imagery, or satellite remote sensing has not been empirically validated. 

Deep learning comparison scope. The comparison with deep learning methods (Ta-ble 6) uses published results from the original papers rather than re-running all methods under identical conditions. While our BFORE results are obtained on the same LOL eval15 split, differences in preprocessing or evaluation implementation may affect comparability. A 22 fully controlled comparison with re-executed deep learning baselines would provide stronger evidence. 

# 5 Conclusion and Future Work 

In this paper, we proposed BFORE (Butterfly-Firefly Optimized Retinex Enhancement), a novel hybrid metaheuristic-optimized framework for low-light image enhancement. The pro-posed method integrates a multi-stage Retinex-based enhancement pipeline with a hybrid Butterfly Optimization Algorithm (BOA) and Firefly Algorithm (FA) strategy that automat-ically optimizes all pipeline parameters, including MSRCR Gaussian scales and color restora-tion coefficients, AGCWD gamma correction parameters, and ABM3D denoising thresholds. A convergence-based switching mechanism dynamically balances global exploration (BOA) and local exploitation (FA) for robust and effective parameter search. Experimental evaluation on the LOL benchmark dataset (15 paired test images) demon-strates that BFORE achieves the highest PSNR (17.22 dB) among all traditional enhance-ment methods, with 20.3% improvement over HE and 17.5% over MSRCR. BFORE produces the most naturally balanced mean brightness (129.97), closest to the ideal mid-tone value. Notably, BFORE outperforms the deep learning baseline RetinexNet in both PSNR (+2.7%) and SSIM (+27.4%) without requiring any training data. The hybrid BOA-FA optimization contributes a 12.3% PSNR improvement and 14.8% SSIM improvement over the unoptimized pipeline. Ablation studies confirm that FA optimization of AGCWD and denoising param-eters is the primary driver of improvement (+11.8% PSNR), while the full hybrid strategy achieves the best overall performance across diverse lighting conditions. In future work, we plan to extend BFORE in several directions: (1) incorporating a lightweight deep learning-based initial parameter estimation module to reduce optimization iterations and improve processing speed; (2) extending the framework to video enhancement with temporal coherence constraints; (3) exploring additional metaheuristic algorithms such as the Whale Optimization Algorithm and the Harris Hawks Optimizer for potential further improvements; and (4) applying BFORE to domain-specific applications including underwa-ter image enhancement, medical imaging, and autonomous driving perception systems. 

# Data Availability 

The LOL dataset used in this study is publicly available at https://daooshee.github. io/BMVC2018website/ . The source code for the BFORE framework is available at https: //github.com/acherif/bfore .

# Declaration of Competing Interest 

The author declares that there are no known competing financial interests or personal rela-tionships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 23 Author Contributions 

Single author paper. The author conceived the study, designed the methodology, developed the software, conducted the experiments, analyzed the results, and wrote the manuscript. 

# Ethics Approval 

Not applicable — this study does not involve human participants or animal subjects. 

# Consent to Participate 

Not applicable. 

# Consent for Publication 

Not applicable. 

# References 

[1] Abdullah-Al-Wadud, M., Kabir, M.H., Dewan, M.A.A., Chae, O.: A dynamic his-togram equalization for image contrast enhancement. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics 53 (2), 593–600 (2007) [2] Arora, S., Anand, P.: A novel adaptive butterfly optimization algorithm. International Journal of Computational Mathematics and Sciences 7(5), 26–34 (2018) [3] Arora, S., Singh, S.: Butterfly optimization algorithm: a novel approach for global optimization. Soft Computing 23 (3), 715–734 (2019) [4] Arora, S., Singh, S.: An improved butterfly optimization algorithm with chaos. Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems 36 (6), 5879–5899 (2019) [5] Bhandari, A.K., Kumar, A., Singh, G.K.: Modified artificial bee colony based computa-tionally efficient multilevel thresholding for satellite image segmentation using Kapur’s, Otsu and Tsallis function. Expert Systems with Applications 42 (3), 1573–1601 (2015) [6] Cai, J., Gu, S., Zhang, L.: Learning a deep single image contrast enhancer from multi-exposure images. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 27 (4), 2049–2062 (2018) [7] Chen, C., Chen, Q., Xu, J., Koltun, V.: Learning to see in the dark. In: IEEE Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 3291–3300 (2018) [8] Dabov, K., Foi, A., Katkovnik, V., Egiazarian, K.: Image denoising by sparse 3-D transform-domain collaborative filtering. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 

16 (8), 2080–2095 (2007) 24 [9] Deng, L., et al.: Low-illumination image enhancement algorithm based on improved multi-scale retinex and ABC algorithm optimization. Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 10 , 865820 (2022) [10] Fan, G., Yao, Z., Chen, G.Y., Su, J.N., Gan, M.: IniRetinex: rethinking retinex-type low-light image enhancer via initialization perspective. In: AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pp. 1–9 (2025) [11] Fister, I., Yang, X.S., Brest, J., Fister Jr, I.: Modified firefly algorithm using quaternion representation. Expert Systems with Applications 40 (18), 7220–7230 (2013) [12] Gonzalez, R.C., Woods, R.E.: Digital Image Processing , 4th edn. Pearson, New York (2018) [13] Guo, C., Li, C., Guo, J., et al.: Zero-reference deep curve estimation for low-light image enhancement. In: IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pp. 1780–1789 (2020) [14] He, K., Sun, J., Tang, X.: Guided image filtering. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Anal-ysis and Machine Intelligence 35 (6), 1397–1409 (2013) [15] Horng, M.H.: Vector quantization using the firefly algorithm for image compression. 

Expert Systems with Applications 39 (1), 1078–1091 (2012) [16] Huang, S.C., Cheng, F.C., Chiu, Y.S.: Efficient contrast enhancement using adaptive gamma correction with weighting distribution. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 

22 (3), 1032–1041 (2013) [17] Ibrahim, H., Kong, N.S.P.: Brightness preserving dynamic histogram equalization for image contrast enhancement. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics 53 (4), 1752– 1758 (2007) [18] Jiang, Y., Gong, X., Liu, D., et al.: EnlightenGAN: deep light enhancement without paired supervision. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 30 , 2340–2349 (2021) [19] Jobson, D.J., Rahman, Z., Woodell, G.A.: A multiscale retinex for bridging the gap between color images and the human observation of scenes. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 6(7), 965–976 (1997) [20] Jobson, D.J., Rahman, Z., Woodell, G.A.: Properties and performance of a cen-ter/surround retinex. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 6(3), 451–462 (1997) [21] Jyothi, P., Haritha, D., Arava, K.: A robust deep learning framework for accurate pose and gender prediction. Multimedia Tools and Applications 85 , 269 (2026) [22] Kennedy, J., Eberhart, R.: Particle swarm optimization. In: IEEE International Con-ference on Neural Networks , vol. 4, pp. 1942–1948 (1995) [23] Kim, Y.T.: Contrast enhancement using brightness preserving bi-histogram equaliza-tion. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics 43 (1), 1–8 (1997) 25 [24] Land, E.H.: The retinex theory of color vision. Scientific American 237 (6), 108–129 (1977) [25] Land, E.H., McCann, J.J.: Lightness and Retinex theory. Journal of the Optical Society of America 61 (1), 1–11 (1971) [26] Li, H., et al.: Enhanced retinex algorithm for mine image enhancement using improved bootstrap filter. Journal of China Coal Society 45 (S2), 1010–1018 (2020) [27] Li, C., Guo, C., Chen, C.L.: Learning to enhance low-light image via zero-reference deep curve estimation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 

44 (8), 4225–4238 (2022) [28] Liu, J., Xu, D., Yang, W., Fan, M.: Benchmarking low-light image enhancement and beyond. International Journal of Computer Vision 129 , 1153–1184 (2021) [29] Liu, R., Ma, L., Zhang, J., Fan, X., Luo, Z.: Retinex-inspired unrolling with cooperative prior architecture search for low-light image enhancement. In: IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 10561–10570 (2021) [30] Loh, Y.P., Chan, C.S.: Getting to know low-light images with the exclusively dark dataset. Computer Vision and Image Understanding 178 , 30–42 (2019) [31] Ma, J., et al.: Multi-scale retinex with color restoration image enhancement based on Gaussian filtering and guided filtering. International Journal of Modern Physics B 

31 (16), 1744077 (2017) [32] Makhadmeh, S.N., Al-Betar, M.A., Abasi, A.K., et al.: Recent advances in butterfly op-timization algorithm, its versions and applications. Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering 30 , 1399–1420 (2023) [33] Mirjalili, S.: Genetic algorithm. In: Evolutionary Algorithms and Neural Networks , SCI, vol. 780, pp. 43–55. Springer (2019) [34] Ning, X., Su, J., Kochan, O.: Low-illumination image enhancement method based on adaptive MSRCR algorithm. In: CEUR Workshop Proceedings , vol. 3387, pp. 78–89 (2023) [35] Parthasarathy, S., Sankaran, P.: An automated multi scale retinex with color restoration for image enhancement. In: IEEE National Conference on Communications , pp. 1–5 (2012) [36] Petro, A.B., Sbert, C., Morel, J.M.: Multiscale retinex. Image Processing On Line 4,71–88 (2014) [37] Pizer, S.M., Amburn, E.P., Austin, J.D., et al.: Adaptive histogram equalization and its variations. Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing 39 (3), 355–368 (1987) 26 [38] Provenzi, E., De Carli, L., Rizzi, A., Marini, D.: Mathematical definition and analysis of the retinex algorithm. Journal of the Optical Society of America A 22 (12), 2613–2621 (2005) [39] Sadia, H., Azeem, F., Ullah, H., et al.: Color image enhancement using multiscale retinex with guided filter. Multimedia Tools and Applications 78 , 12455–12475 (2019) [40] Sharma, T.K., Pant, M.: Butterfly Optimization Algorithm: Theory and Engineering Applications . Springer, Singapore (2022) [41] Su, Z., et al.: Multi-scale gradient domain-guided filtering for low-illumination scene image enhancement. IEEE Access 8, 176502–176515 (2020) [42] Talbi, E.G.: A taxonomy of hybrid metaheuristics. Journal of Heuristics 8(5), 541–564 (2002) [43] Tilahun, S.L., Ong, H.C.: Modified firefly algorithm. Journal of Applied Mathematics 

2012 , 467631 (2012) [44] Wang, Z., Bovik, A.C., Sheikh, H.R., Simoncelli, E.P.: Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 13 (4), 600–612 (2004) [45] Wang, S., Zheng, J., Hu, H.M., Li, B.: Naturalness preserved enhancement algorithm for non-uniform illumination images. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 22 (9), 3538–3548 (2013) [46] Wang, T., Zhang, K., Shen, T., Luo, W., Stenger, B., Lu, T.: Ultra-high-definition low-light image enhancement: a benchmark and transformer-based method. In: AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 37, pp. 2654–2662 (2023) [47] Wei, C., Wang, W., Yang, W., Liu, J.: Deep retinex decomposition for low-light en-hancement. In: British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC) , pp. 1–12 (2018) [48] Xu, X., Wang, R., Lu, J.: Low-light image enhancement via structure modeling and guidance. In: IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 9893–9903 (2023) [49] Yan, B.J., Dong, H., Liu, Y.L.: Image enhancement of foreign objects in underground coal transportation belt based on improved retinex algorithm. Multimedia Tools and Applications 85 , 271 (2026) [50] Yang, X.S.: Firefly algorithms for multimodal optimization. In: Stochastic Algorithms: Foundations and Applications , LNCS, vol. 5792, pp. 169–178. Springer (2009) [51] Yin, S., et al.: MambaDPF-Net: a dual-path fusion network with selective state space modeling for robust low-light image enhancement. Electronics 14 (22), 4533 (2025) 27 [52] Zamir, S.W., Arora, A., Khan, S., et al.: Learning enriched features for real image restoration and enhancement. In: European Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 492– 511 (2020) [53] Zhang, Y., Zhang, J., Guo, X.: Kindling the darkness: a practical low-light image enhancer. In: ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pp. 1632–1640 (2019) [54] Zhang, H., et al.: Improved bilateral filtering and multi-scale Retinex for image en-hancement. Journal of Image and Graphics 26 (4), 681–693 (2021) [55] Zhi, X., et al.: Enhanced Retinex algorithm combined with CLAHE for image contrast improvement. Optik 260 , 169027 (2022) [56] Zuiderveld, K.: Contrast limited adaptive histogram equalization. In: Graphics Gems IV , pp. 474–485. Academic Press (1994) 28