Title: Fusing Urban Structure and Semantics: A Conditional Diffusion Model for Cross-City OD Matrix Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.00938v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 00:08:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 47

Markdown Content:
# Fusing Urban Structure and Semantics: A Conditional Diffusion Model for Cross-City OD Matrix Generation 

Bin Chen a,1 , Zhuoya Meng a,1 , Fang Yang b, Runkang Guo b, Jingtao Ding c,Yin Zhang d, Chuan Ai b, ∗, Zhengqiu Zhu b, ∗

> a

Institute of Intelligent Computing, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC), Chengdu, 611731, Sichuan, China 

> b

College of Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, 410073, Hunan, China 

> c

Department of Electronic Engineering, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 

> d

School of Information and Communication Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC), Chengdu, 611731, Sichuan, China 

Abstract 

Accurate modeling of commuting flows is important for urban governance, traffic planning, and resource allocation. However, the combined influence of individual intentions, geographic constraints, and social dynamics leads to considerable heterogeneity in commuting patterns, making it difficult to develop generation models that generalize across cities. To address this issue, we propose SEDAN, a Structure-Enhanced Diffusion model conditioned on 

Attributed Nodes for generalizable OD matrix generation. SEDAN mod-els a city as an attributed graph. Each region is treated as a node with demographic and point-of-interest features, and commuting flows are mod-eled as weighted edges. Adjacency and distance matrices are incorporated to characterize spatial structure. Based on this representation, we design a fusion mechanism within SEDAN to jointly model semantic information and spatial information. Regional semantic attributes are used to model latent travel demand through graph-transformer-based node interactions, while spa-tial structure is injected into the generation process as explicit constraints. The adjacency matrix guides attention weights to strengthen interactions between neighboring regions. Meanwhile, the distance matrix serves as a 

> ∗

Corresponding author, zhuzhengqiu12@nudt.edu.cn 

> 1

Equal Contribution 

> arXiv:2605.00938v1 [cs.LG] 1 May 2026

diffusion condition to capture spatial proximity and travel impedance. The fusion of urban semantics and spatial constraints enables SEDAN to gen-erate OD matrices that are both behaviorally plausible and geographically coherent. Experiments on real-world OD datasets from U.S. cities show that SEDAN achieves a 7.38% improvement in RMSE over the state-of-the-art baseline, WEDAN. It also remains robust across heterogeneous urban sce-narios and varying structural patterns. Our work provides an effective and generalizable solution for commuting OD matrix generation. The code is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/SEDAN. 

Keywords: OD matrix generation, Diffusion model, Feature fusion, Graph transformer, Cross-city generalization 

1. Introduction 

Commuting behavior, as a core component of daily travel, reflects the spatiotemporal relationship between where people live and where they work. The origin–destination (OD) matrix represents commuting flows between ur-ban regions. It can be modeled as a directed, weighted graph, where nodes denote regions and edges denote the intensity of OD flows [1–3]. As urban systems grow increasingly complex, transportation and land-use planning face escalating challenges due to longer commutes, job–housing imbalances, and intensified peak-hour congestion. OD flows serve as a fundamental rep-resentation of commuting behavior and provide important insights for urban zoning and transport planning [4–6]. Therefore, accurate and generalizable OD flow modeling and generation have emerged as critical tasks in urban computing. Existing OD modeling methods can be broadly categorized into mechanism-driven and data-driven approaches. Traditional mechanism-driven models, such as gravity models [7] and radiation models [8], primarily describe human mobility patterns as functions of distance and population. Later variants, such as the attraction-constrained gravity model [9], the doubly-constrained gravity model [10], and the universal opportunity model [11], better capture diverse mobility contexts and urban structural characteristics. However, they still struggle to capture complex spatial heterogeneity and nonlinear depen-dencies, which limits their performance across diverse urban contexts. With recent advances in artificial intelligence, data-driven learning has become the dominant paradigm for modeling urban OD flows. Early studies 2employed supervised architectures, such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [12], Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [13], and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [14]. These methods perform well when data are abundant. However, many cities suffer from a lack of mobility data due to limited sensing infrastructure, motivating the exploration of generative approaches. Models such as VAEs [15], GANs [16], and diffusion models [17] can learn underlying mobility patterns from data-rich cities and generate OD flows for regions with scarce historical data. To improve cross-city generalization, transfer learning methods [18, 19] align feature spaces and transfer knowledge across domains. However, their effectiveness often depends on domain similarity. Unlike macro-level OD flow generation, LLM-based approaches [20] focus on modeling individual-level travel behaviors and leverage the pretrained knowledge of large language models to synthesize realistic travel survey data. Although recent methods have shown promising results, they often strug-gle to simultaneously achieve high modeling accuracy and robust cross-city generalization. Urban commuting flows are shaped by multiple factors, in-cluding regional functions, urban structure, individual travel preferences, and socioeconomic conditions. Consequently, we regard the generation of OD matrices as a task driven by the coupling of multi-source heterogeneous in-formation. Specifically, we focus on three core challenges: 1. Urban population mobility is influenced by a wide range of factors, including diverse regional attributes, urban topology, and spatial rela-tionships between regions. Designing effective mechanisms to fuse this heterogeneous information for modeling population mobility patterns remains a critical challenge. 2. Urban commuting flows are influenced by multi-scale spatial depen-dencies, including local interactions between adjacent regions and long-range connections between residential areas and urban centers. Ac-curately capturing both local and global spatial structures remains a challenge in fine-grained OD flow modeling. 3. Different cities exhibit significant differences in population distribu-tion, land use patterns, transportation network topology, and mobility behaviors. These discrepancies greatly hinder the transferability and applicability of models to new cities. Despite the complex heterogeneity across cities, commuting flows consis-tently exhibit fundamental spatial regularities, such as distance-decay effects 3and high flow concentration between adjacent regions, as detailed in Ap-pendix A. Existing methods often mix city-specific semantics with universal spatial priors in an implicit representation, which can hinder the preservation of these spatial patterns. Instead, we treat spatial information as an explicit structural constraint and incorporate spatial priors into the generation pro-cess to enforce the structural consistency of OD flows. We first formulate the OD matrix as a directed, weighted graph and define its generation as a spatially constrained edge-weight prediction task. We then propose SEDAN, a Structure-Enhanced Diffusion model conditioned on Attributed Nodes, to enhance structural modeling and enable cross-city generalization. This is achieved through a heterogeneous information fusion mechanism, where semantic information models latent commuting demand and spatial informa-tion provides explicit structural constraints during generation. Specifically, a graph transformer captures the nonlinear relationships among urban regions to model latent commuting demand based on demographic and functional features. Meanwhile, during the diffusion process, two complementary spa-tial priors are introduced as structural constraints. The adjacency matrix guides the attention mechanism to preserve local topological connectivity, while the distance matrix provides edge-level diffusion conditioning to cap-ture global spatial proximity and distance-decay effects. To mitigate scale disparities across cities and long-tail effects, we apply a logarithmic trans-formation to stabilize training. The main contributions are summarized as follows: 1. We propose SEDAN, a structure-enhanced graph diffusion model that reformulates OD matrix generation as a semantics-driven task under spatial structural constraints. By explicitly fusing regional attributes and spatial priors, it accurately models and generates complex com-muting flows. 2. We introduce a spatially guided denoising mechanism for joint model-ing of multi-scale spatial dependencies. It combines adjacency-based attention to capture local connectivity and distance-based diffusion conditioning to model global spatial proximity, thereby improving the geographic consistency of generated OD matrices. 3. We develop a graph transformer-based denoising network guided by spatial constraints. It learns a stable mapping between spatial struc-tures and flow distributions, enabling robust generation across cities with diverse scales and morphologies. 44. Experiments on the LargeCommuingOD dataset [21] show that SEDAN outperforms state-of-the-art baselines on key metrics, including CPC, RMSE and JSD. The model also remains robust across cities with di-verse urban structures and different levels of urban heterogeneity. 

2. Related Works 

2.1. Data-Driven Approaches for Modeling OD Flows 

Origin-Destination (OD) flow refers to the movement of entities (e.g., peo-ple, vehicles) from an origin to a destination during a specified time period. Driven by the growing availability of large-scale urban data, OD modeling has evolved from rule-based methods to data-driven approaches, including predictive models, transfer learning and generative models. Supervised predictive models typically leverage regional attributes and historical flow data to predict OD flows. Machine learning methods, such as gradient-boosted regression trees [22] and random forests [23], show improved performance over conventional models. More recent approaches incorporate spatial and functional information: GMEL [24] exploits adjacency relations to enhance representation learning, while Rong et al. [14] capture spatiotem-poral variations in population distribution and incorporate POI data to infer OD flows. However, most predictive models are trained on cities with avail-able OD data and applied to predict flows in target cities, which often results in cross-city errors [25, 26]. To mitigate errors in cross-city OD generation, transfer learning has been explored to improve model transferability by projecting data from differ-ent cities into a shared latent space. For instance, GODDAG [19] combines graph neural networks with domain adversarial learning to transfer mobility patterns from a source city to a target city for OD flow generation. How-ever, their transfer performance often declines when substantial structural differences exist between source and target cities. Compared with the above methods, generative models [27–29] have at-tracted increasing attention due to their low dependence on privacy-sensitive data and effectiveness in sparse-data scenarios. NetGAN [30], a representa-tive method, generates graph structures by learning random walk sequences, effectively preserving topological features while enabling link prediction. How-ever, it struggles to explicitly model node attributes and geographic cor-relations. Our approach explicitly incorporates both node attributes (i.e., demographics and POIs) and their geographic spatial correlations into the 5generation process, enabling more accurate and spatially-consistent modeling of OD flow distributions. 

2.2. Diffusion Models for OD Flow Generation 

Diffusion models [29] have emerged as powerful generative frameworks, achieving remarkable success across various domains, including image [31, 32], audio [33, 34], and text generation [35–37]. Recently, their integration with graph learning has opened up new opportunities for urban OD flow generation. Among existing studies, DiffODGen [17] models the spatial distribution of OD matrices from a network perspective. It employs a cascaded diffusion mechanism to separately learn graph topology and edge weights, enhancing the representation of sparse OD structures. Nonetheless, it has limited capac-ity to model intricate spatial interactions across urban areas. More recently, by embedding geographic attribute learning into a denoising diffusion model, WEDAN [21] achieves more accurate OD matrix generation. It has become one of the strongest baseline models in OD flow generation. In addition, GlODGen[38] generates commuting OD flows using remote sensing imagery, avoiding reliance on multi-source urban data. Despite these advancements, most existing models fail to incorporate spa-tial adjacency and distance constraints, limiting their capacity to model ur-ban spatial interactions in different urban contexts. We integrate adjacency and geographic distance into the diffusion process, which preserves local and global spatial correlations and enhances cross-city transferability. Table 1 compares the key properties of SEDAN with other representative methods. 

3. Problem Formulation for Cross-City OD Generation Urban Region: An urban region refers to an administrative unit (e.g., census tract) representing a specific spatial area. Suppose a city is partitioned into N such regions. The set of urban regions is defined as: 

R = {r1, r 2, . . . , r N }. (1) 

Regional Features: Regional features describe the characteristics of an urban region, including demographic attributes and POIs. The feature vector for region ri is defined as: 

Xi = [ X(1)  

> i

, X(2)  

> i

] ∈ Rd, d = d1 + d2, (2) 6Table 1: Comparison of representative methods on key properties.                                                          

> Method Classif. Rep. Information Spatial Temporal Modeling Gener.
> GMEL [24] Predictive Model Graph Infrastructure, Land Use Adjacency, Distance ✗Pair-wise ✗
> GSTE-DF [14] Predictive Model Graph Population Distribution, POIs Adjacency ✓Pair-wise ✗
> Deep Gravity [25] Predictive Model Grid Population, Land Use, Road Network, POIs Distance ✗Pair-wise ✓
> SIRI [26] Predictive Model Grid Demographics, POIs Distance ✗Pair-wise ✗
> NetGAN [30] GAN Graph Adjacency-Based Random Walk –✗Holistic ✗
> DiffODGen [17] Diffusion Model Graph Demographics, POIs Distance ✗Holistic ✓
> WeDAN [21] Diffusion Model Graph Demographics, POIs Distance ✗Holistic ✓
> SEDAN (ours) Diffusion Model Graph Demographics, POIs Adjacency, Distance ✗Holistic ✓

Abbreviations: Classif.=Classification; Rep.=Representation; Gener.=Generalization. 

Notes: “Modeling” denotes the modeling granularity, where Pair-wise independently pre-dicts each OD pair, while Holistic learns the global distribution jointly. “Temporal” indicates whether temporal dynamics are modeled. “Generalization” reflects whether the model demonstrates cross-city transferability. 

where X(1)  

> i

∈ Rd1 represents demographic features and X(2)  

> i

∈ Rd2 represents POI features. The full feature matrix for the city is: 

XR = [ X1, X2, . . . , XN ]⊤ ∈ RN ×d. (3) 

Commuting OD Flow: Commuting OD flow represents the number of commuters moving between urban regions. It is directional, reflecting both outflow and inflow. The commuting OD matrix is defined as: 

F ∈ RN ×N , (4) where Fij denotes the number of commuters traveling from urban region ri

to region rj .

Cross-City OD Generation Problem: Given a set of source cities with observed OD matrices and urban characteristics, the goal is to learn a 7transferable model that generates the commuting OD matrix F for an unseen target city based only on its regional features and urban spatial structure. 

4. Methodology 

The overall architecture of SEDAN comprises two core components: an urban characteristics embedding module and a graph transformer. The em-bedding module encodes regional attributes (population demographics and POIs) and spatial information (adjacency and distance matrices). The graph transformer captures complex nonlinear relationships among urban regions, modeling how regional functionality and population characteristics jointly shape latent travel demand under spatial adjacency and distance constraints. Together, these two components enable SEDAN to generate OD matrices that are structurally consistent and behaviorally plausible. 

4.1. Directed Weighted Graph Modeling of OD Flows 

To investigate the relationship between urban spatial structures and com-muting patterns, the commuting OD matrix is modeled as a directed weighted graph [1] G = ( V, E, W). The city is divided into n = |V| discrete regions, where V = {v1, v 2, . . . , v n} denotes the set of nodes, each of which represents an urban region; E is the set of directed edges representing commuting be-tween regions; and W denotes the weights of the edges, corresponding to the volume of commuting flows. Each node vi ∈ V corresponds to a region ri characterized by a feature vector Xi. The complete set of regional features constitutes the matrix 

XR = {Xi | vi ∈ V} .The spatial relationships among urban regions are characterized by a distance matrix D and an adjacency matrix A. The distance matrix D =

{dij |ri, r j ∈ R} represents the geographic distance dij between regions ri and 

rj . The adjacency matrix A = [ aij ] ∈ R|V|×|V| is a binary matrix indicating whether two regions are geographically adjacent: aij = 1 if ri and rj are adjacent, and aij = 0 otherwise. The urban context representation of the city, denoted as CR, consists of three components: the node feature XR, the distance matrix D and the ad-jacency matrix A. Collectively, they capture demographic and POI-related attributes, the spatial configuration of the city, and the topological relation-ships among regions. 8Distance Matrix      

> S patial S tructure
> Regional Features
> (a) Urban Context (b) Directed Weighted Commuting OD Graph
> Adjacency Matrix
> Male
> Point-of-interests Demographic
> Urban Regions
> OD Flow
> Health Education Female Fig. 1. Construction of the directed weighted graph for commuting OD

As illustrated in Fig. 1, the OD generation task is formulated as a condi-tional probabilistic modeling problem. Given the urban context representa-tion CR, the objective is to learn the distribution: 

Pθ(E, {we | e ∈ E} | C R), (5) which models how spatial structure and regional attributes jointly influence the commuting flows. 

4.2. Spatially-Guided Diffusion on Weighted Edges 

To effectively model how urban functional semantics and spatial struc-tures jointly shape commuting flows, SEDAN employs a conditional diffusion framework that generates OD matrices under explicit spatial constraints. In real-world, flow patterns are influenced by both global distance decay and local network connectivity. Accordingly, SEDAN conditions the diffusion pro-cess on two spatial priors: the adjacency matrix, which preserves local con-nectivity, and the distance matrix, which maintains global proximity. Fig. 2 illustrates the two-stage process, from forward diffusion to reverse denoising. In the forward diffusion stage, noise is incrementally added to transform the OD graph from a structured state into a fully corrupted representation. Noise is added independently to each edge, enabling precise modeling of flow 9Urban  Regions  OD Flow                               

> Denoising Process
> Forward Process
> Raw OD graph Noisy OD Graph
> Noisy OD Flow Noisy OD Flow 1
> (|)tt
> q F F−1
> (|)tt
> pFF
> 
> −Urban Regions OD Flow
> Denoising Process
> Forward Process
> Raw OD graph Noisy OD Graph
> Noisy OD Flow Noisy OD Flow 1
> (|)tt
> q F F−1
> (|)tt
> pFF
> 
> −

Fig. 2. Generation process of the commuting OD matrix 

values for every OD pair (i, j ). The process is described as: 

q(F tij |F t−1 

> ij

) = N



F tij ; p1 − βtF t−1 

> ij

, β tI



, (6) 

q(F 1 

> ij

, ..., F Tij |F 0 

> ij

) = 

> T

Y

> t=1

q(F tij |F t−1 

> ij

), (7) where F tij denotes the flow value of OD pair (i, j ) at time step t, and βt is the noise scale parameter that controls the intensity of noise injection. As t

increases, the original OD matrix is gradually perturbed by Gaussian noise, eventually converging to a standard normal distribution. The denoising process serves as the inverse of forward diffusion, aiming to iteratively recover the true OD matrix from a noisy state. Unlike the forward process that adds noise independently to each edge, the reverse diffusion reconstructs the entire OD matrix collectively, thereby preserving the global spatial configuration and relationships among regions. To ensure that the generated OD matrix is consistent with the spatial characteristics of the target city, SEDAN integrates a spatial conditioning mechanism. During reverse diffusion, structural information of the target city is injected into the denoising network as a conditional input, enabling the model to better capture spatial semantics and enhance the accuracy of OD flow reconstruction. The conditional probability of the reverse diffusion step is formulated as: 

pθ

 Ft−1 | Ft, CR

 = N  Ft−1; μθ(Ft, t, CR), (1 − ¯αt) I , (8) 10 μθ(Ft, t, CR) = 1

√αt



Ft − βt

√1 − ¯αt

ϵθ(Ft, t, CR)



(9) where t is the diffusion step, αt ∈ (0 , 1) is the variance preserving coefficient, 

βt = 1 − αt, and ¯αt = Qts=1 αs. Ft ∈ RN ×N denotes the noisy OD matrix at step t, ϵθ(·) is the noise predicted by the denoising network with parameters 

θ, CR is the urban context ( the node feature, the distance matrix and the adjacency matrix ), and I is the identity matrix. 

4.3. Structure-Enhanced Denoising Network 

During the reverse diffusion stage, the model progressively reconstructs the ground-truth OD matrix via the denoising network. To capture the joint effects of urban functional semantics and spatial structure on commuting flows, SEDAN leverages regional attributes to model interactions among ur-ban regions, thereby characterizing latent commuting demand. Meanwhile, adjacency and distance information are injected as explicit spatial priors to guide the denoising process. The overall architecture is shown in Fig. 3. The network takes the urban region feature matrix XR as node input and the noisy OD matrix Ft as edge input. We first embed regional features and the noisy OD matrix, and linearly project two spatial priors into learnable feature spaces: 

H0 = MLP( XR), E0 = MLP( Ft),

Sadj = Linear( A), Sdis = Linear( D), (10) where XR ∈ RN ×dx denotes attributes of N regions (demographics, POIs), 

Ft ∈ RN ×N is the noisy OD matrix at timestep t. A ∈ RN ×N is the adjacency matrix and D ∈ RN ×N is the distance matrix. To model how regions interact under spatial constraints, we stack graph transformer layers that iteratively update node and edge representations and output the edge-level noise ϵθ. For the k-th head in layer l, the attention coefficient between node i and its neighbor j is computed as: 

ak,l ij = Qk,l hli · Kk,l hlj

√dk

+ W k,l ReLU(Linear([ elij ; Sadj  

> ij

])) ,αk,l ij = softmax j (ak,l ij ),

(11) where hli and elij are the node and edge features at the l-th layer, respec-tively. Qk,l and Kk,l are the query and key matrices of the k-th attention 11 Spatial information  

> Regional
> Features
> Distance Adjacency
> Noise OD
> MLP MLP
> Regional
> Characteristics
> Distance  Noise OD

(a)  Urban  Characteristics Embedding  

> Regional Characteristics
> Linear  Linear
> Adjacency

HE 

> Regional
> Features
> Distance Adjacency
> Noise OD
> MLP MLP
> Regional
> Characteristics
> Distance  Noise OD

(a)  Urban  Characteristics Embedding  

> Regional Characteristics
> Linear  Linear
> Adjacency

HE 

> Adjacency
> Urban Characteristics Embedding

Graph Transformer 

> Fully connected Layer 

 

> Noise OD Matrix Regional
> Characteristics
> Distance

(b)  SEDAN  Framework 

> Distance
> Guidance
> Distance
> Guidance
> Distance
> Guidance
> Graph Transformer Layer

(c)  Graph Transformer 

> Topology Prior
> Topology Prior
> Graph Transformer Layer

HE0

H0

E1

H1

El

Hl

EL

E

> Distance
> Guidance adj
> Sdis
> S

Fig. 3. Denoising network of SEDAN. (a) Urban characteristics embedding: regional attributes and the noisy OD matrix are mapped to initial node and edge features, and encoding spatial prior. (b) Overall framework: regional attributes, a noisy OD matrix, and two spatial priors (adjacency and distance) are provided as inputs to the model. After the urban characteristics embedding, features pass through a stacked graph transformer and a fully connected layer to predict edge-level noise. (c) Graph Transformer: regional attributes serve as node inputs, and the noisy OD matrix provides edge inputs. Each layer jointly updates node and edge representations, where the topology prior preserves local connectivity and the distance guidance maintains global proximity. Color legend: regional features (red), noisy OD (purple), distance (green), adjacency (orange). 

head at the l-th layer. W k,l is the weight matrix of the k-th attention head at the l-th layer. dk is the dimension of the query and key vectors. The first term is the standard attention score, which captures semantic interactions between node features. The second term introduces a structure-aware bias by incorporating the adjacency prior into the edge representation, thereby encouraging stronger attention between geographically adjacent node pairs. As a result, the model preserves local connectivity while still capturing se-mantic dependencies from node features. Node representations are updated through the following formula: 

hl+1 

i = Olh ∥Kk=1 ( X

rj ∈N ri

αk,l ij V k,l hlj ), (12) where V k,l is the value matrix of the k-th attention head at the l-th layer. Olh

12 is the output MLP for the node features at the l-th layer. K is the number of attention heads. Nri is the set of neighbor nodes that are connected to node 

vi. To incorporate the distance prior, the attention logits from all heads are concatenated and projected into the edge feature space. The resulting edge representation is then combined with Sdis  

> ij

:

el+1  

> ij

= Ole ∥Kk=1 (ak,l ij ) + Sdis  

> ij

, (13) where Ole is the output MLP for the edge features at the l-th layer. After stacking L layers, the edge-level noise is predicted by the fully connected layer: 

ˆϵθ = MLP( EL. (14) While spatial structure constraints enable the model to capture topolog-ical and geographical relationships, commuting OD flows still exhibit sub-stantial numerical heterogeneity. This heterogeneity arises from variations in population density, infrastructure, and land use, frequently resulting in a long-tail distribution. Such skewness can impede model convergence and lead to unstable training. To alleviate this, we apply a logarithmic transformation to stabilize the value range: 

˙Fij = log( Fij + 1) , Fij = exp( ˙Fij ) − 1. (15) The log-transformed flows ˙Fij are used during training, and recovered via exponential transformation during inference, mitigating the impact of extreme values. 

4.4. Model Training 

SEDAN adopts the standard loss formulation of diffusion probabilistic models to train the denoising network. Specifically, it minimizes the mean squared error between the predicted noise and the ground-truth noise added during the forward diffusion process. The loss function is defined as follows: 

L = Et,ϵ ∼N (0 ,I )

∥ ϵ − ϵθ(Ft, t, CR) ∥22

 . (16) Although standard diffusion models generate high-quality samples, their iterative denoising steps lead to high computational overhead during infer-ence. To improve efficiency, we adopt Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIM) [39], which accelerates sampling while preserving output fidelity.A 13 detailed analysis of the inference time across different city scales is provided in Appendix C. The training procedure of the directed graph diffusion model is summa-rized in Algorithm 1. In each iteration, the model samples a directed graph from the training set and determines the diffusion step t. Gaussian noise is added to the clean OD matrix, and the denoising network predicts the injected noise given the noisy matrix, timestep, and urban features. 

Algorithm 1 Training Procedure of SEDAN 

Input: A set of directed graphs Gtrain ,

Output: Trained network parameters θ. 

> 1:

Sample a graph G from Gtrain with OD matrix F and urban characteristics 

CR 

> 2:

Sample timestep t ∼ U{ 1, 2, . . . , T } 

> 3:

Sample noise ϵ ∼ N (0 , I) 

> 4:

Generate noisy input: ˜Ft ← √¯αt F + √1 − ¯αt · ϵ 

> 5:

Compute loss: L ← ϵ − ϵθ( ˜Ft, t, CR) 22 

> 6:

Update parameters: θ ← optimizer.step (L)

After training, the model proceeds to the generation phase. As detailed in Algorithm 2, we adopt the DDIM sampling strategy to efficiently gener-ate OD matrices by reversing the diffusion process. Beginning with a pure Gaussian noise OD matrix, the model iteratively denoises it using the trained network, ultimately reconstructing an OD matrix that conforms to the spa-tial characteristics of the target city. 

5. Experiment 

In this section, we first present the experimental settings, including dataset, model parameter configurations, evaluation metrics, and baseline methods. We then provide a detailed comparison of our approach with ten represen-tative baselines. To evaluate the cross-city generalization capability of the proposed model, we perform experiments on cities of diverse scales and struc-tural patterns. An ablation study further investigates the contribution of spatial constraints to OD flow generation. We further employ SHAP anal-ysis to reveal key urban attributes that influence the generation process. Finally, a case study visualizes how the model leverages spatial priors, from local structural to global dependencies. 14 Algorithm 2 Generation Procedure of SEDAN 

Input: urban characteristics CR,trained denoising network θ,DDIM sampling step size τ ,

Output: Generated OD matrix F. 

> 1:

Initialize FT ∼ N (0 , I) 

> 2:

Set step interval ∆t ← Tτ 

> 3:

for t = T, T − ∆t, . . . , 1 do  

> 4:

F t−∆t ← 1√αt



F t − 1−αt√1− ¯αt ϵθ(F t, t, CR)

 

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

return F0

5.1. Experimental Setup 5.1.1. Datasets 

This study utilizes the LargeCommuingOD dataset [21], which covers 3,233 spatial units across the United States, including counties and cen-sus tracts. The dataset integrates multi-source information to construct re-gional features. Key data sources include the American Community Survey (ACS), the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LODES) dataset, and OpenStreetMap (OSM). These sources collectively provide detailed de-scriptors of demographic composition and urban layout. The LODES dataset constructs a national commuting OD matrix based on employer-employee relationships, reflecting commuting flows between home and workplace in 2018. The ACS provides 97 indicators spanning demo-graphic and socioeconomic domains to characterize each region’s population composition and economic structure. Each entry in the OD matrix quan-tifies commuting flows from residential to workplace regions, characterizing the spatial structure of intercity mobility. To quantify spatial proximity and contiguity, the dataset includes a Euclidean distance matrix (computed from regional centroids) and an adjacency matrix (based on geographic bound-aries). 

5.1.2. Evaluation Metrics 

The performance of the model is evaluated from two perspectives: nu-merical accuracy and spatial structural fidelity. For numerical accuracy, we employ Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) [40, 41] and Normalized Root Mean Square Error (NRMSE) [14] to quantify the deviation between generated and 15 ground-truth OD matrices. To assess spatial structural fidelity, we adopt two metrics: Common Part of Commuters (CPC) [24] and Jensen–Shannon Di-vergence (JSD) [17, 21]. CPC measures the overlap between generated and real OD matrices in terms of OD pairs, with higher values indicating greater similarity in commuting patterns. JSD evaluates the symmetric divergence between the probability distributions of generated and real data across three dimensions: inflow, outflow, and total OD flow. Lower JSD values suggest better alignment with actual spatial mobility structures, providing a measure of the model’s ability to reproduce realistic flow patterns. All evaluation metrics are computed at the urban region level, and the final results are reported as the average across all cities. The specific formulas are defined as follows: RMSE =

s 1

|F|

X 

> ri,r j∈R

|| Fij − ˆFij || 22, (17) NRMSE = RMSE 

q 1 

> N2

P  

> ri,r j∈R

|| Fij − ¯Fij || 22

, (18) CPC = 2 ·

P  

> ri,r j∈R

min( Fi,j , ˆFi,j )

P 

> ri,r j∈R

(Fij + ˆFij ) , (19) JSD = KL (PF|| PˆF) + KL (PˆF|| PF)2 , (20) where ¯F denotes the mean of all elements in the ground-truth OD matrix F,and KL refers to the Kullback–Leibler divergence. P represents the empirical probability distribution. The inflow of region i is computed as the total volume received from all other regions PNj=1 Fji , while the outflow is defined as the total volume departing from region PNj=1 Fij .

5.1.3. Baselines 

To systematically evaluate the performance of SEDAN, we conduct bench-mark experiments across ten representative models, which fall into four major categories: physics-based models, data-driven models, element-wise predic-tion models, and matrix-level generative models. 

(1) Physics-based models 

16 • GM-P [7]: Gravity Model with Power-law Decay. Assumes OD flow is proportional to the populations of the origin and destination, and inversely proportional to a power of the distance. 

• GM-E [42]: A variant of GM-P with exponential distance decay. 

(2) Statistical learning approaches 

• SVR [43] : Support Vector Regression. An SVM-based regression that fits a maximum-margin function and ignores small errors to improve generalization. 

• RF [23, 44]: Random Forest. An ensemble of decision trees trained on bootstrap samples, with predictions aggregated by averaging. Captures complex non-linear dependencies in high-dimensional data. 

• GBRT [22]: Gradient Boosting Regression Trees. Incrementally op-timizes tree ensembles via gradient boosting, focusing on error mini-mization while adaptively controlling model complexity. 

• DGM [25]: Deep Gravity Model. Combines deep learning with tradi-tional gravity formulations, learning flow distributions via neural net-works to better capture high-dimensional features. 

(3) Element-wise prediction models 

• GMEL [24]: Leverages GNNs to integrate spatial and neighborhood information, enhancing regional embeddings via a multi-task frame-work and capturing interregional geographic dependencies for OD pre-diction. 

(4) Matrix-level generative models 

• NetGAN [30]: A GAN-based method that learns the distribution of random walks from real networks and generates new walks to recon-struct realistic graph topologies. 

• DiffODGen [17]: A cascade diffusion model generating urban OD ma-trices, modeling graph topology and edge weights separately to improve large-scale prediction accuracy. 

• WeDAN [21]: A denoising diffusion model generating OD matrices by learning regional attributes, effectively capturing spatial dependencies and outperforming traditional and deep generative baselines. 17 5.1.4. Experiment Settings 

Experiments were conducted on a platform with an Intel Xeon Gold 6348 processor (2.60 GHz, 14 cores), 100 GB RAM, and a single NVIDIA A800 GPU (80 GB memory). We split the LargeCommuingOD dataset [21] into training, validation, and test sets in an 8:1:1 ratio. Each experiment was repeated five times independently, and the mean results were reported. The diffusion model was trained with a 1000-step denoising process, us-ing the cosine noise scheduling strategy proposed by Nichol et al. [45]. The denoising network was optimized using the AdamW optimizer [46] with a learning rate of 1e-4. SEDAN adopts a four-layer graph transformer archi-tecture, with each layer consisting of 32 hidden units. During the generation phase, SEDAN, DiffODGen, and WEDAN each perform 10 stochastic sam-pling runs, and the mean of these samples is used as the final output. The gravity model follows the parameterization proposed by Barbosa et al. [47], incorporating four tunable parameters. The random forest model is config-ured with 100 estimators. The Deep Generative Model (DGM) [25] consists of 10 stacked layers, each with 64 hidden units. The GNN baseline is im-plemented with three layers, each containing 64 channels. The dual-cascade diffusion architecture and the denoising network configuration in DiffOD-Gen [17] are kept consistent with those used in SEDAN. The hyperparame-ters of the model were selected based on validation set to balance predictive accuracy and computational efficiency. A sensitivity analysis is provided in Appendix Appendix D. 

5.2. Comparisons with the SOTA Baselines 

To evaluate the modeling capacity and generalization performance of SEDAN, we perform a systematic comparison across ten representative mod-els, with the results summarized in Table 2. The experimental results demonstrate that SEDAN consistently outper-forms existing baseline methods across multiple key metrics. In terms of numerical accuracy, it improves the CPC score by 3.39% compared to the strongest baseline, WEDAN. It also reduces RMSE by 7.38%, indicating higher accuracy in generating commuting flows. The slight increase in NRMSE may result from SEDAN’s stronger emphasis on high-volume OD pairs. Al-though this trade-off leads to a minor rise in normalized errors, these OD pairs dominate the overall commuting network and offer greater practical value for urban traffic planning. Regarding spatial distribution modeling, SEDAN significantly reduces the JSD for inflow, outflow, and OD flow by 18 Table 2: Performance Comparison on OD Matrix Generation. Bold : Best; Underline: Second best. 

Model Flow Accuracy Flow Distribution (JSD) 

CPC ↑ RMSE ↓ NRMSE ↓ Inflow ↓ Outflow ↓ ODflow ↓

GM-P [7] 0.32 174.00 2.22 0.67 0.66 0.41 GM-E [42] 0.33 162.90 2.08 0.65 0.64 0.42 SVR [43] 0.42 95.40 1.22 0.42 0.56 0.41 RF [23, 44] 0.46 100.40 1.28 0.42 0.50 0.22 GBRT [22] 0.46 91.00 1.62 0.42 0.49 0.23 DGM [25] 0.43 92.90 1.19 0.47 0.56 0.23 GMEL [24] 0.44 94.30 1.20 0.45 0.36 0.21 NetGAN [30] 0.49 89.10 1.14 0.43 0.35 0.19 DiffODGen [17] 0.53 74.60 0.95 0.32 0.27 0.15 WEDAN [21] 0.59 68.60 0.88 0.29 0.27 0.15 

SEDAN 0.61 63.54 0.93 0.26 0.21 0.11 

10.34%, 22.22%, and 26.67%, respectively. These gains reflect improved structural consistency between the generated and real-world OD matrices. Additionally, we draw the following findings: 

• Data-driven models substantially outperform traditional physics-based models . They capture complex nonlinear interregional interac-tions, enabling fine-grained human mobility modeling and preserving global spatial dependencies. 

• The joint OD matrix distribution learning strategy preserves spatial dependencies and global flow patterns more effectively than pairwise modeling approaches (e.g., SVR, RF) that treat each OD pair independently. 

• Urban topological information enables strong cross-city gener-alization , helping SEDAN maintain robust performance across diverse urban environments and consistently surpass existing graph-based gen-erative models (e.g., NetGAN, DiffODGen). 19 5.3. Analysis of Model Generalization Across Heterogeneous Urban Scenarios 

In commuting OD flow generation tasks, the spatial complexity of cities significantly impacts model performance. To systematically evaluate SEDAN’s generalization ability, we categorize cities into three types based on the num-ber of regions: small cities (0-10 regions), medium cities (11-50 regions), and large cities (51-100 regions). Based on this, we construct three test scenarios to progressively increase dataset heterogeneity: the low-heterogeneity sce-nario includes only small cities, the medium-heterogeneity scenario encom-passes small and medium cities, and the high-heterogeneity scenario covers all three city types. We then compare SEDAN with the baseline model WEDAN to examine whether integrating spatial priors during the denoising process can maintain robust performance as dataset heterogeneity increases. The results are summarized in Table 3.                                          

> Table 3: Performance Results Across Heterogeneous Urban Scenarios. Bold : Best.
> Test Scenario Category Metric WEDAN SEDAN
> Low-Heterogeneity Flow Accuracy CPC ↑0.62 0.65
> RMSE ↓83.16 74.40
> NRMSE ↓1.03 0.96
> Distribution (JSD) Inflow ↓0.34 0.35 Outflow ↓0.29 0.24
> ODFlow ↓0.15 0.13
> Medium-Heterogeneity Flow Accuracy CPC ↑0.57 0.62
> RMSE ↓71.48 66.79
> NRMSE ↓1.04 0.97
> Distribution (JSD) Inflow ↓0.30 0.28
> Outflow ↓0.26 0.23
> ODFlow ↓0.13 0.11
> High-Heterogeneity Flow Accuracy CPC ↑0.59 0.62
> RMSE ↓72.96 63.47
> NRMSE ↓1.04 0.93
> Distribution (JSD) Inflow ↓0.31 0.26
> Outflow ↓0.26 0.22
> ODFlow ↓0.14 0.11

Although CPC slightly decreases for both models as urban heterogene-ity increases, SEDAN consistently outperforms WEDAN across all scenarios. 20 Regarding error metrics, SEDAN achieves lower RMSE and NRMSE across all settings. From the low-heterogeneity to medium-heterogeneity scenar-ios, both models exhibit reduced RMSE values, indicating improved learning under moderate diversity. However, under high heterogeneity, WEDAN’s RMSE increases from 71.48 to 72.96, while SEDAN’s continues to decline, implying that SEDAN adapts better to complex and diverse urban environ-ments. In terms of distributional consistency, SEDAN also outperforms WEDAN across most JSD metrics. The only exception arises in the low-heterogeneity scenario, likely due to the limited spatial structure that constrains the effec-tiveness of its structure-guided design. In contrast, WEDAN, which relies less on spatial priors, generalizes slightly better under such low-structure conditions. As heterogeneity increases, SEDAN’s advantage in maintaining distributional alignment becomes increasingly evident. Based on these ob-servations, the following conclusions can be drawn: 

• Model performance is affected by data heterogeneity. As het-erogeneity increases, WEDAN’s performance fluctuates, indicating that heterogeneous urban scenarios present challenges for models with lim-ited spatial awareness. 

• SEDAN remains robust with increasing urban heterogeneity and preserves spatial distributional consistency. This suggests that leveraging regional semantics together with spatial priors helps the model adapt to city-specific mobility patterns while maintaining a stable spatial structure. 

5.4. Analysis of Model Robustness Across Cities with Different Structures 

To assess SEDAN’s adaptability to diverse urban forms, we develop a city structure classification method that considers both morphological and functional dimensions. The method identifies monocentric, uniform, and polycentric forms from four perspectives: population distribution, OD flows, commuting distance, and an integrated measure. The multi-perspective ur-ban classification method is described in Appendix B. Table 4 summarizes the proportion of cities in the LargeCommuingOD dataset [21] belonging to each structural type, based on our multi-perspective classification. Most cities are either polycentric or uniformly distributed in terms of population and OD flows, while commuting distances tend to follow 21 a monocentric pattern. This heterogeneity may shape commuting behaviors and consequently influence the performance of OD flow generation models. We evaluate SEDAN in each structural category to assess its robustness and adaptability. 

> Table 4: Urban Structural Typologies across Multiple Dimensions

Classification Dimension Proportion of Cities Monocentric Uniform Polycentric 

Population Distribution 23.80% 34.39% 41.81% OD Flow Distribution 29.00% 45.30% 25.70% Commuting Distance 45.12% 24.15% 30.73% Integrated Classification 27.99% 30.73% 41.28% Fig. 4 presents the model performance across four classification perspectives— population distribution, OD flow, commuting distance, and the integrated perspective. The results of experiments indicate that SEDAN outperforms the baseline model WEDAN across most urban structure classifications, ex-hibiting notable improvements in both flow magnitude accuracy and spatial distribution consistency. In the OD flow-based classification experiments, SEDAN consistently out-performs the baseline model WEDAN. Compared to WEDAN, SEDAN im-proves CPC by 8.0% in monocentric cities and improves by 12.0% in polycen-tric cities. It also significantly reduces both RMSE and NRMSE. The per-formance gains are especially notable in polycentric settings, where SEDAN models complex commuting patterns more effectively. In terms of distribu-tional consistency, SEDAN achieves lower JSD values for inflow, outflow, and OD flow than WEDAN. In the classification based on distance distribution, SEDAN also shows superior performance in terms of CPC and RMSE. Although the model shows a slight drop in CPC for uniformly structured cities under the population-based classification, it still performs well in monocentric and polycentric settings. This decline likely stems from the absence of distinct structural centers and dominant commuting flows in uniformly structured cities, where OD patterns are generally more diffuse and irregular. By contrast, in cities with pronounced spatial organization and complex inter-regional interac-tions, SEDAN is able to more effectively model mobility patterns by jointly 22 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 M-CPC P-CPC U-CPC M-RMSE P-RMSE U-RMSE M-NRMSE P-NRMSE U-NRMSE Distribution (JSD) (d) Integrated Classification (c) Population-based Classification (b) Distance-based Classification (a) OD Flow-based Classification Accuracy Distribution (JSD) Accuracy Distribution (JSD) Accuracy Distribution (JSD) Accuracy M-CPC P-CPC U-CPC M-RMSE P-RMSE U-RMSE M-NRMSE P-NRMSE U-NRMSE M-CPC P-CPC U-CPC M-RMSE P-RMSE U-RMSE M-NRMSE P-NRMSE U-NRMSE M-In U-OD P-OD M-OD U-Out P-Out M-Out U-In P-In M-In U-OD P-OD M-OD U-Out P-Out M-Out U-In P-In M-In U-OD P-OD M-OD U-Out P-Out M-Out U-In P-In M-In U-OD P-OD M-OD U-Out P-Out M-Out U-In P-In M-CPC P-CPC U-CPC M-RMSE P-RMSE U-RMSE M-NRMSE P-NRMSE U-NRMSE 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 M- : MonocentricP- : PolycentricU- : Uniform                                      

WEDAN S E D A N

0.3

0.6

0.9

1.2

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.3

0.6

0.9

1.2

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4Fig. 4. Performance across different urban structure. (a) OD flow–based classification, (b) distance–based classification, (c) population–based classification, and (d) integrated classification. Each subfigure contains two radar charts: the left summarizes accuracy 

for cities grouped by structure—monocentric (M), polycentric (P), and uniform (U); the right reports distributional consistency measured by JSD for inflow, outflow, and OD flow. Orange lines denote WEDAN and blue lines denote SEDAN. For clarity, RMSE values are rescaled by a factor of 1/100 . This normalization does not affect the relative performance comparison. 

leveraging spatial priors and regional semantics. By jointly considering OD flows, spatial distance, and population distri-bution, SEDAN achieves improvements over WEDAN across all evaluation metrics. Particularly in polycentric urban structures, it achieves a 13.9% higher CPC, reduces RMSE from 86.90 to 38.03, and lowers OD flow JSD from 0.146 to 0.114. These results highlight SEDAN’s robustness in modeling complex urban mobility patterns. This robustness is rooted in SEDAN’s effective fusion of spatial struc-ture and regional semantics. Spatial priors provide a structural foundation that delineates geographically plausible connections, while regional attributes 23 supply functional context, enabling the model to identify flows that reflect actual mobility demand. Through this integrated modeling, SEDAN cap-tures universal mobility patterns, leading to consistent performance across monocentric, uniform, and polycentric cities. 

5.5. Feature Missing Robustness Analysis 

In cross-city OD generation, the target city, especially an underdeveloped city, often lacks complete fine-grained POI or demographic data. To eval-uate model robustness under such conditions, we conduct a feature-missing experiment. Specifically, 10%, 30%, and 50% of node features are randomly masked, and missing values are imputed using the city-level mean of each feature. The results are reported in Table 5. As the masking ratio increases, the performance of both WEDAN and SEDAN declines, but SEDAN consistently outperforms WEDAN across all settings. The CPC of SEDAN remains above 0.56 under all masking ratios, whereas that of WEDAN drops from 0.56 to 0.53. Even under the severe 50% masking condition, SEDAN still achieves a lower RMSE (69.45) than WEDAN (76.19), indicating stronger robustness when semantic features are heavily corrupted. SEDAN also shows better distributional consistency. Under 50% mask-ing, its ODFlow JSD is 0.14, compared with 0.19 for WEDAN. These results suggest that adjacency and distance priors provide stable spatial structural constraints when semantic features are degraded, thereby partially compen-sating for the missing information. 

5.6. Ablation Study 

To systematically evaluate the contribution of each component in SEDAN, we conduct an ablation study from four aspects: spatial priors, semantic in-formation (demographics and POIs), fusion mechanism, and the diffusion generation mechanism. We consider six variant models: 

• w/o A: The adjacency matrix is removed, preventing the model from explicitly leveraging topological relationships among regions. 

• w/o D: The distance matrix is removed, eliminating information on spatial proximity and travel resistance. 

• w/o AD: Both adjacency and distance matrices are removed, leaving the model to rely solely on regional features. 24 Table 5: Performance under Varying Feature Mask Ratios. Bold : Best.                                         

> Mask Ratio Category Metric WEDAN SEDAN
> 10% Flow Accuracy CPC ↑0.56 0.61
> RMSE ↓72.37 64.69
> NRMSE ↓1.05 0.95
> Distribution (JSD) Inflow ↓0.33 0.31
> Outflow ↓0.28 0.22
> ODFlow ↓0.16 0.12
> 30% Flow Accuracy CPC ↑0.55 0.59
> RMSE ↓74.14 67.24
> NRMSE ↓1.14 0.98
> Distribution (JSD) Inflow ↓0.34 0.32
> Outflow ↓0.31 0.24
> ODFlow ↓0.17 0.13
> 50% Flow Accuracy CPC ↑0.53 0.56
> RMSE ↓76.19 69.45
> NRMSE ↓1.15 1.01
> Distribution (JSD) Inflow ↓0.37 0.33
> Outflow ↓0.32 0.27
> ODFlow ↓0.19 0.14

• w/o POI: The POI features are removed. 

• w/o Diffusion: The diffusion process is removed, and OD flows are directly predicted through the Graph Transformer. 

• w/o Constraint: The proposed fusion mechanism is removed, and spatial priors are simply treated as edge features. From the perspective of spatial priors, w/o AD performs the worst on almost all metrics and shows the largest increase in JSD, indicating a sub-stantial discrepancy between the generated and real OD distributions. Re-moving either the adjacency matrix or the distance matrix also degrades performance, suggesting that the two types of spatial priors play comple-mentary roles in the diffusion process. In addition, although w/o Constraint still uses complete spatial priors as inputs, it remains inferior to the full model. This suggests that performance depends not only on the availability of spatial priors, but also on their integration into the model. 25 0.56 0.59 0.41 0.59 0.61 0.60 0.62 73.10 66.28 81.02 75.29 65.19 66.24 63.40 1.05 0.92 1.09 1.23 0.94 0.93 0.93 0.31 0.29 0.44 0.28 0.29 0.31 0.26 0.26 0.23 0.47 0.23 0.24 0.23 0.22 0.14 0.12 0.21 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.11 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 (a) CPC CPC w/o A  w/o D  w/o AD  w/o POI  w/o Diffusion  w/o Constraint  SEDAN  w/o A  w/o D  w/o AD  w/o POI  w/o Diffusion  w/o Constraint  SEDAN  w/o A  w/o D  w/o AD  w/o POI  w/o Diffusion  w/o Constraint  SEDAN  w/o A  w/o D  w/o AD  w/o POI  w/o Diffusion  w/o Constraint  SEDAN  w/o A  w/o D  w/o AD  w/o POI  w/o Diffusion  w/o Constraint  SEDAN  w/o A  w/o D  w/o AD  w/o POI  w/o Diffusion  w/o Constraint  SEDAN 020 40 60 80 100 120 140 (b) RMSE RMSE  0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0 (c) NRMSE NRMSE  0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 (d) InFlow JSD      

0.0

0.2 0 . 4

0.6

0.8

(e)OutFlowJSD

>    

0.0

0.1 0 . 2

0.3

0.4

(f)ODflowJSD

>      

Fig. 5. Ablation study results. Comparison of the full SEDAN model against six variants: 

w/o A (without adjacency prior), w/o D (without distance prior), w/o AD (without either prior), w/o POI (without POI features), w/o Diffusion (without the diffusion process), and w/o Constraint (without spatial information fusion mechanism). Perfor-mance is reported on six metrics: (a) CPC ↑, (b) RMSE ↓, (c) NRMSE ↓, (d) Inflow JSD ↓,(e) Outflow JSD ↓, and (f) ODFlow JSD ↓.

From the semantic perspective, removing POI features leads to clear per-formance degradation, especially in numerical error metrics: the RMSE in-creases from 63.40 to 75.29, and the NRMSE rises from 0.93 to 1.23. This suggests that POI information, which reflects regional functional semantics, is crucial for capturing urban commuting demand. Removing the diffusion process worsens distribution-related metrics: the Inflow JSD increases from 0.26 to 0.29, and the Outflow JSD rises from 0.22 to 0.24. This suggests that while direct regression fits flow intensity well, it is less effective at recovering the global flow distribution. In contrast, diffusion better captures the underlying data distribution. Although diffusion intro-duces additional computational cost, it is acceptable for offline applications such as transportation planning [26] and public health modeling [48], where distribution fidelity matters more than inference efficiency. These results lead to three main findings: 26 • Semantic and spatial information play distinct but complementary roles: semantic features capture regional functions and latent travel demand, whereas spatial priors provide structural constraints for OD generation. 

• Transforming spatial priors into explicit structural constraints is more effective than simply treating them as input features. 

• Adjacency and distance information are highly complementary, en-abling the model to preserve both local topology and global spatial regularity. 

5.7. Feature Contribution Analysis 

The generation of OD matrices is a complex task, as commuting flows are influenced by a variety of factors in different ways. Identifying key fea-tures and understanding their contributions are crucial for improving model performance and interpretability. We employ SHAP (Shapley Additive Ex-planations) [49] to quantify the relative importance of different features. The explanation target is defined as the average outflow of a target region. We use KernelSHAP to estimate the marginal contribution of each input fea-ture. The absolute SHAP value reflects the feature’s importance, with larger values indicating a greater contribution to the model’s output. Details are provided in Appendix E. The OD matrix is derived from the LODES dataset, which records home-to-work commuting flows based on employer–employee relationships. There-fore, the features analyzed in this section describe regional job–housing struc-ture at the macro level. Figure 6 presents the SHAP values of the top 20 demographic features, which can be grouped into four dimensions: age structure, education, trans-portation resources, and economic and household characteristics. Overall, age-related features show the strongest effects, while education and trans-portation resources also contribute substantially. Economic and household characteristics have relatively weaker effects. Among the age-related features, Female, 20–24 has the highest impor-tance. This may reflect the prominent role of younger populations in com-muting, as well as the tendency for women to work in sectors with more regular commuting patterns, such as education and healthcare. "Age 5-9" and "Female, 15-19" are also important. These variables may indirectly re-flect household structure. Areas with more school-age children often indicate 27 a higher concentration of young families and thus stronger commuting de-mand. "Median Age", "Male, 45-49", and "Female, 30-34" reflect the stable commuting demand of the middle-aged workforce. Education-related features cover several stages, from preschool to sec-ondary and higher education. Population at basic education stages often reflects the concentration of young families and the associated commuting demand. Populations with higher education levels directly represent the po-tential commuting population. Transportation resources also play an important role. "3 or More Vehi-cles" shows the strongest effect, as greater vehicle availability usually corre-sponds to higher travel flexibility. Meanwhile, "No Vehicle" also shows rela-tively high importance, suggesting that these populations rely more heavily on public transportation. In the economic and household dimension, "Female Poverty" shows the strongest effect, possibly reflecting livelihood-related travel under economic constraints. "Total Households" and "Average Family Size" capture the un-derlying scale of commuting demand. 28 0 1 2 3 4 5

Mean (SHAP value) 

> Female, 20-24
> Age 5-9
> Median Age
> Male, 45-49
> Female Population
> Female, 15-19
> Female, 30-34
> 4.6974
> 2.0938
> 0.8903
> 0.8385
> 0.8262
> 0.8207
> 0.4764

(a) Age structure      

> 012345

Mean (SHAP value) 

> Kindergarten
> Associate's Degree
> High School: Grade 9-12
> College or Associate
> High School Graduate or Higher
> 3.9604
> 2.5969
> 2.4920
> 1.1233
> 0.3724

(b) Education      

> 012345

Mean (SHAP value) 

> 3 or More Vehicles
> No Vehicle
> 1 Vehicle
> 2 Vehicles
> 3.6339
> 1.1320
> 0.9615
> 0.6604

(c) Transportation resources      

> 012345

Mean (SHAP value) 

> Female Poverty
> Total Households
> Average Family Size
> Private Wage Workers
> 2.8282
> 1.0449
> 0.6456
> 0.5819

(d) Economic & Household Fig. 6. SHAP values of the top 20 demographic features. The selected features are grouped into four dimensions: (a) age structure, (b) education, (c) transportation re-sources, and (d) economic and household characteristics. 

Figure 7 shows the SHAP values of the top 10 POI features. These features reflect urban functional characteristics. Among them, "Accommo-dation" has the highest importance, suggesting that residential areas are the main origins of commuting flows. "Education", "Health", and "Government" are also highly important. These POIs are often associated with urban cen-ters and therefore help shape commuting patterns. "Fast Food" also shows a notable effect, as such facilities are often located in busy urban areas. By contrast, "Ice Cream", "Recycling", and "Boutique" are non-core amenities, and their effects on commuting flows are relatively limited. 29 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 

> Mean (SHAP value)
> Accommodation
> Education
> Health
> Fast Food
> Government
> Service
> Finance
> Ice Cream
> Recycling
> Boutique
> 1.8169
> 1.5264
> 1.2247
> 1.1576
> 1.0868
> 0.5277
> 0.3998
> 0.3649
> 0.3106
> 0.1201

Fig. 7. SHAP values of the top 10 POI features 

Overall, SHAP analysis reveals the critical influence of demographic and POI features in the OD flow generation, indicating that model predictions are jointly driven by socioeconomic characteristics and spatial environmental factors. Population composition, transportation accessibility, and the spatial layout of functional facilities collectively play a central role in shaping OD distribution. 

5.8. Case Study 

We conduct a case study to examine the attention patterns across layers and evaluate how the model leverages spatial priors. By comparing the at-tention matrices with the adjacency and distance-based similarity matrices, we analyze how SEDAN captures spatial dependencies at different stages. As shown in Fig. 8, the shallow layers rely heavily on spatial informa-tion. In Layer 1, several high-attention regions closely match the adjacency matrix, as highlighted by the red solid boxes. This observation is consis-tent with the strong correlation with adjacency (P = 0.70), suggesting that the model initially aggregates information mainly from nearby regions. This structural reliance begins to decline in Layer 2, where both correlations drop markedly, suggesting a shift toward cross-region interactions. By Layer 3, the correlations become negative, implying that the model is exploring non-local 30 Fig. 8. Visualization of attention weights across transformer layers. (a) Binary adjacency matrix representing the graph topology. (b) Distance-based similarity matrix derived from physical distance, where shorter distances correspond to higher similarity. (c) Attention weight heatmaps across four transformer layers. Darker colors indicate larger attention weights between origin–destination region pairs. Each attention map reports its Pearson correlation (P) with the adjacency matrix (A) and the distance-based similarity matrix (D), computed over off-diagonal elements. A higher positive correlation indicates that the attention pattern is more consistent with the corresponding spatial prior, whereas a lower or negative correlation suggests weaker dependence on spatial structure. 

or long-range dependencies. In Layer 4, strong attention from multiple ori-gins converges on two destination regions, as highlighted by the blue dashed boxes. This pattern suggests that the model has identified certain nodes as potential hubs or bridges that play a central role in information flow. These results reveal a clear hierarchical learning strategy. The shallow layers are primarily guided by spatial priors, grounding the model in the underlying spatial structure. In the intermediate layers, these constraints are gradually relaxed, allowing the model to capture interregional mobility patterns shaped by functional and demographic characteristics. The deep layers reflect a deeper integration of spatial and regional attributes, enabling the model to identify key roles such as hubs and bridges. This progression 31 illustrates how SEDAN effectively combines spatial structure with regional attributes to build a robust understanding of mobility patterns. 

6. Discussion 

By integrating regional features and spatial priors into a conditional dif-fusion framework, SEDAN effectively addresses the challenges of generating accurate OD flows and generalizing across heterogeneous urban settings. The results convey three main messages: (1) SEDAN explicitly fuses regional fea-tures and spatial structure priors during the diffusion process, enabling uni-fied modeling of node semantics and spatial structure. This improves both the accuracy and structural fidelity of the generated OD matrices. (2) The performance gain is especially pronounced in polycentric cities, suggesting that structural priors help mitigate structural drift and enhance robustness under complex urban structure. (3) The adjacency matrix provides local connectivity, while the distance matrix captures global proximity relations. These priors impose complementary local-to-global constraints, improving the distributional consistency of the generated OD matrices. 

Drawbacks. Despite the strong results, this work has several limitations. (1) Lack of temporal dynamics : The model is trained on static OD data and does not capture temporal evolution patterns influenced by holidays, special events, or emergencies. (2) Simplified spatial priors : The current priors are limited to adjacency and distance matrices. Richer sources such as road networks and public transit are not yet incorporated. (3) Assumption of feature-space consistency : The model assumes consistent semantics for features such as population and facilities across cities. However, differences in statistical standards between cities may introduce mismatches, which can degrade model stability in highly heterogeneous settings. (4) Limited regional diversity : This study is based on data from U.S. cities. While the results are encouraging, the applicability of the model to cities in other geographic and socioeconomic contexts remains worth exploring. 

Potential Avenues. To address these limitations, future research may explore the following directions. (1) Temporal dynamics . Introduce time se-ries modeling to capture the evolution of OD flows, enabling the model to capture temporal dependencies. (2) Multi-view spatial fusion : Build a multi-view modeling framework that integrates road network, functional zoning, and transport infrastructure to better capture urban spatial relationships and mobility patterns. (3) City similarity constraints : Incorporate inter-city 32 similarity as a guidance within diffusion to promote pattern transfer from structurally similar cities and enhance cross-city generalization. (4) Learn-ing shared mobility regularities : Future work could investigate how to learn mobility regularities shared across cities while preserving city-specific char-acteristics, thereby improving adaptability to cities from different countries. 

Implications. Methodologically, SEDAN shows that injecting explicit struc-tural priors into diffusion models improves both accuracy and structural re-alism. Practically, these improvements are also meaningful for real-world applications. High-fidelity OD matrix generation can support a variety of downstream tasks, including urban planning [5, 26, 50], transportation car-bon emission assessment [4], and public health modeling [48, 51]. More broadly, SEDAN underscores the value of coupling deep representations with structural priors when handling large-scale, heterogeneous urban data. This structure-guided diffusion paradigm is not confined to urban systems and may also be applicable to other complex networks, such as logistics systems, epidemic propagation, and information diffusion. 

7. Conclusion 

This study proposes SEDAN, a structure-enhanced diffusion model for OD matrix generation that simultaneously achieves accurate flow generation and robust generalization across heterogeneous cities. The core design of SEDAN lies in formulating OD matrix generation as a task driven by the coupling of multi-source heterogeneous information, jointly modeling urban semantics and spatial structure. The model incorporates two complementary spatial priors into the graph transformer: the adjacency matrix preserves lo-cal topological connectivity, while the distance matrix captures global spatial proximity. Under these spatial constraints, SEDAN models how functional and demographic characteristics jointly determine latent commuting demand. Via this deep fusion of semantic and structural information, SEDAN cap-tures complex nonlinear inter-regional interactions and generates OD ma-trices that are both geographically consistent and behaviorally meaningful. Experimental results demonstrate that SEDAN outperforms the SOTA base-line, WEDAN: the JSD of inflow, outflow, and overall OD flow decreases by 10.34%, 22.22%, and 26.67%. SEDAN provides a generalizable framework for modeling complex urban mobility patterns and can be extended to other spatial graph generation tasks. 33 References 

[1] M. Saberi, H. S. Mahmassani, D. Brockmann, A. Hosseini, A complex network perspective for characterizing urban travel demand patterns: graph theoretical analysis of large-scale origin–destination demand net-works, Transportation 44 (6) (2017) 1383–1402. [2] M. Saberi, T. H. Rashidi, M. Ghasri, K. Ewe, A complex network methodology for travel demand model evaluation and validation, Net-works and Spatial Economics 18 (4) (2018) 1051–1073. [3] C. Rong, J. Ding, Y. Li, An interdisciplinary survey on origin-destination flows modeling: Theory and techniques, ACM Computing Surveys 57 (1) (2024) 1–49. [4] J. Zeng, Y. Liu, J. Ding, J. Yuan, Y. Li, Estimating on-road trans-portation carbon emissions from open data of road network and origin-destination flow data, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Arti-ficial Intelligence, Vol. 38, 2024, pp. 22493–22501. [5] K. Credit, Z. Arnao, A method to derive small area estimates of linked commuting trips by mode from open source lodes and acs data, Environ-ment and Planning B: Urban Analytics and City Science 50 (3) (2023) 709–722. [6] T. Yang, Understanding commuting patterns and changes: Counterfac-tual analysis in a planning support framework, Environment and plan-ning b: urban analytics and city science 47 (8) (2020) 1440–1455. [7] G. K. Zipf, The p 1 p 2/d hypothesis: on the intercity movement of persons, American sociological review 11 (6) (1946) 677–686. [8] F. Simini, M. C. González, A. Maritan, A.-L. Barabási, A universal model for mobility and migration patterns, Nature 484 (7392) (2012) 96–100. [9] D. A. Griffith, M. M. Fischer, Constrained variants of the gravity model and spatial dependence: model specification and estimation issues, in: Spatial Econometric Interaction Modelling, Springer, 2016, pp. 37–66. [10] M. Cai, Doubly constrained gravity models for interregional trade esti-mation, Papers in Regional Science 100 (2) (2021) 455–475. 34 [11] E.-J. Liu, X.-Y. Yan, A universal opportunity model for human mobility, Scientific reports 10 (1) (2020) 4657. [12] C. Rong, J. Feng, Y. Li, Deep learning models for population flow gen-eration from aggregated mobility data, in: Adjunct Proceedings of the 2019 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings of the 2019 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers, 2019, pp. 1008–1013. [13] C. Rong, Z. Liu, J. Ding, Y. Li, Learning to generate temporal origin-destination flow based-on urban regional features and traffic informa-tion, ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data 18 (6) (2024) 1–17. [14] C. Rong, T. Li, J. Feng, Y. Li, Inferring origin-destination flows from population distribution, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 35 (1) (2021) 603–613. [15] D. Huang, X. Song, Z. Fan, R. Jiang, R. Shibasaki, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Kato, A variational autoencoder based generative model of urban human mobility, in: 2019 IEEE conference on multimedia information processing and retrieval (MIPR), IEEE, 2019, pp. 425–430. [16] X. Ouyang, Y. Yang, W. Zhou, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, W. Huang, City-trans: Domain-adversarial training with knowledge transfer for spatio-temporal prediction across cities, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 36 (1) (2023) 62–76. [17] C. Rong, J. Ding, Z. Liu, Y. Li, Complexity-aware large scale origin-destination network generation via diffusion model, arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04873 (2023). [18] T. He, J. Bao, R. Li, S. Ruan, Y. Li, L. Song, H. He, Y. Zheng, What is the human mobility in a new city: Transfer mobility knowledge across cities, in: Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, 2020, pp. 1355– 1365. [19] C. Rong, J. Feng, J. Ding, Goddag: Generating origin-destination flow for new cities via domain adversarial training, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 35 (10) (2023) 10048–10057. 35 [20] P. Bhandari, A. Anastasopoulos, D. Pfoser, Urban mobility assessment using llms, in: Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems, 2024, pp. 67–79. [21] C. Rong, J. Ding, Y. Liu, Y. Li, A large-scale dataset and benchmark for commuting origin-destination flow generation, in: Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025. [22] C. Robinson, B. Dilkina, A machine learning approach to modeling hu-man migration, in: Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies, 2018, pp. 1–8. [23] N. Pourebrahim, S. Sultana, A. Niakanlahiji, J.-C. Thill, Trip distribu-tion modeling with twitter data, Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 77 (2019) 101354. [24] Z. Liu, F. Miranda, W. Xiong, J. Yang, Q. Wang, C. Silva, Learning geo-contextual embeddings for commuting flow prediction, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, Vol. 34, 2020, pp. 808– 816. [25] F. Simini, G. Barlacchi, M. Luca, L. Pappalardo, A deep gravity model for mobility flows generation, Nature communications 12 (1) (2021) 6576. [26] J. Zeng, G. Zhang, C. Rong, J. Ding, J. Yuan, Y. Li, Causal learning empowered od prediction for urban planning, in: Proceedings of the 31st ACM international conference on information & knowledge man-agement, 2022, pp. 2455–2464. [27] D. P. Kingma, M. Welling, et al., Auto-encoding variational bayes (2013). [28] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, Y. Bengio, Generative adversarial nets, Advances in neural information processing systems 27 (2014). [29] J. Ho, A. Jain, P. Abbeel, Denoising diffusion probabilistic models, Ad-vances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020) 6840–6851. 36 [30] A. Bojchevski, O. Shchur, D. Zügner, S. Günnemann, Netgan: Gener-ating graphs via random walks, in: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, 2018, pp. 610–619. [31] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, B. Ommer, High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-tion, 2022, pp. 10684–10695. [32] F.-A. Croitoru, V. Hondru, R. T. Ionescu, M. Shah, Diffusion models in vision: A survey, IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 45 (9) (2023) 10850–10869. [33] J. Liu, C. Li, Y. Ren, F. Chen, Z. Zhao, Diffsinger: Singing voice syn-thesis via shallow diffusion mechanism, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, Vol. 36, 2022, pp. 11020–11028. [34] D. Yang, J. Yu, H. Wang, W. Wang, C. Weng, Y. Zou, D. Yu, Diffsound: Discrete diffusion model for text-to-sound generation, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 31 (2023) 1720–1733. [35] X. Li, J. Thickstun, I. Gulrajani, P. S. Liang, T. B. Hashimoto, Diffusion-lm improves controllable text generation, Advances in neural information processing systems 35 (2022) 4328–4343. [36] S. Gong, M. Li, J. Feng, Z. Wu, L. Kong, Diffuseq: Sequence to sequence text generation with diffusion models, arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.08933 (2022). [37] T. Wu, Z. Fan, X. Liu, H.-T. Zheng, Y. Gong, J. Jiao, J. Li, J. Guo, N. Duan, W. Chen, et al., Ar-diffusion: Auto-regressive diffusion model for text generation, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023) 39957–39974. [38] C. Rong, X. Zhang, Y. Xi, H. Sui, J. Ding, Y. Li, Satellites reveal mo-bility: A commuting origin-destination flow generator for global cities, arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.15870 (2025). [39] J. Song, C. Meng, S. Ermon, Denoising diffusion implicit models, arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502 (2020). 37 [40] C. Liu, S. Yang, Q. Xu, Z. Li, C. Long, Z. Li, R. Zhao, Spatial-temporal large language model for traffic prediction, in: 2024 25th IEEE Inter-national Conference on Mobile Data Management (MDM), IEEE, 2024, pp. 31–40. [41] C. Liu, K. H. Hettige, Q. Xu, C. Long, S. Xiang, G. Cong, Z. Li, R. Zhao, St-llm+: Graph enhanced spatio-temporal large language models for traffic prediction, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineer-ing (2025). [42] A. Wilson, A statistical theory of spatial distribution models, Trans-portation Research 1 (3) (1967) 253–269. [43] P. Rodríguez-Rueda, J. Ruiz-Aguilar, J. González-Enrique, I. Turias, Origin–destination matrix estimation and prediction from socioeconomic variables using automatic feature selection procedure-based machine learning model, Journal of urban planning and development 147 (4) (2021) 04021056. [44] N. Pourebrahim, S. Sultana, J.-C. Thill, S. Mohanty, Enhancing trip distribution prediction with twitter data: comparison of neural network and gravity models, in: Proceedings of the 2nd acm sigspatial inter-national workshop on ai for geographic knowledge discovery, 2018, pp. 5–8. [45] A. Q. Nichol, P. Dhariwal, Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models, in: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, 2021, pp. 8162–8171. [46] I. Loshchilov, F. Hutter, Decoupled weight decay regularization, arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101 (2017). [47] H. Barbosa, M. Barthelemy, G. Ghoshal, C. R. James, M. Lenormand, T. Louail, R. Menezes, J. J. Ramasco, F. Simini, M. Tomasini, Human mobility: Models and applications, Physics Reports 734 (2018) 1–74. [48] X. Lu, J. Feng, S. Lai, P. Holme, S. Liu, Z. Du, X. Yuan, S. Wang, Y. Li, X. Zhang, et al., Human mobility in epidemic modeling, Physics Reports 1157 (2026) 1–45. 38 [49] S. M. Lundberg, S.-I. Lee, A unified approach to interpreting model pre-dictions, Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017). [50] R. Imai, D. Ikeda, H. Shingai, T. Nagata, K. Shigetaka, Origin-destination trips generated from operational data of a mobile network for urban transportation planning, Journal of Urban Planning and De-velopment 147 (1) (2021) 04020049. [51] D. Mistry, M. Litvinova, A. Pastore y Piontti, M. Chinazzi, L. Fumanelli, M. F. Gomes, S. A. Haque, Q.-H. Liu, K. Mu, X. Xiong, et al., Infer-ring high-resolution human mixing patterns for disease modeling, Nature communications 12 (1) (2021) 323. [52] J. Zhu, X. Niu, Y. Wang, Polycentric urban spatial structure identifica-tion based on morphological and functional dimensions: Evidence from three chinese cities, Sustainability 16 (6) (2024) 2584. [53] C. Tang, J. Dou, Exploring the polycentric structure and driving mecha-nism of urban regions from the perspective of innovation network, Fron-tiers in Physics 10 (2022) 855380. 

Appendix A. Analysis of Spatial Regularities in Commuting Flows 

To uncover the underlying patterns of commuting behaviors, we ana-lyzed the OD data across all cities in the dataset. Table A.6 summarizes these statistics. The results reveal a pronounced distance-decay effect, evi-denced by a strong negative correlation ( −0.472 ) between distance and log-transformed flows. Furthermore, geographical proximity plays a crucial role, with adjacent regions exhibiting notably higher flow intensity and a lower prevalence of zero-flow pairs. These findings reveal spatial regularities across cities. At the city level, such patterns also evident. As illustrated in Figure A.9, the average OD flow decreases with increasing spatial distance, forming a clear distance-decay trend. In addition, Figure A.10 shows that high-flow interactions are pre-dominantly concentrated among adjacent regions, whereas non-adjacent pairs are largely associated with zero or low-volume flows. In summary, although urban characteristics vary widely, spatial regularities rooted in distance and topological adjacency demonstrate a high degree of consistency across differ-ent cities. 39 Table A.6: spatial statistics of commuting flows. 

Metric Value 

Distance-LogFlow Correlation −0.47 

Mean Flow (Adjacent OD Pairs) 80 .00 

Mean Flow (Non-adjacent OD Pairs) 36 .28 

Non-zero Rate (Adjacent OD Pairs) 96 .79% 

Non-zero Rate (Non-Adjacent OD Pairs) 88 .31% 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000  

> Distance
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> Average OD Flow
> Fig. A.9. Distance-decay pattern of OD flows.

Appendix B. Urban Center Structure Classification Method 

The structure of urban centers provides a fundamental basis for under-standing the spatial organization and the distribution of job–housing rela-tionships within cities. Prior studies suggest that urban structure can be characterized from both morphological and functional perspectives [52, 53]. To systematically identify center structure types across different cities, we propose a comprehensive evaluation method that integrates both dimensions. This method provides a solid foundation for evaluating model generalization across structurally diverse cities. This method constructs a multi-dimensional indicator system from three perspectives: population distribution, OD flow, and commuting distance. It is designed to characterize the spatial organization of urban areas and the patterns of job–housing interaction, particularly in terms of their concentra-40 0 Low     

> (1-3)
> Medium
> (4-10)
> High
> (11+)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Ratio
> 5.10% 8.01%
> 14.81%
> 72.09%
> (a) Adjacent Flow Distribution
> 0Low
> (1-3)
> Medium
> (4-10)
> High
> (11+)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Ratio
> 27.03% 28.19%
> 23.88% 20.90%
> (b) Non-Adjacent Flow Distribution

Fig. A.10. The distribution of OD flows. (a) Distribution for adjacent region pairs; (b) Distribution for non-adjacent region pairs. 

tion and spatial dispersion. 

• Population dimension: Includes the Pareto index, primacy index, Gini coefficient, and Herfindahl index, which respectively measure the power-law property of population distribution, dominance of core areas, over-all balance of population distribution, and concentration level of pop-ulation. 

• OD flow dimension: Employs the Gini coefficient of flows, Herfindahl index, maximum flow proportion, and maximum betweenness centrality to characterize the inequality of flows, concentration of dominant nodes, and the influence of key commuting hubs. 

• Commuting distance dimension: Utilizes the same four indicators as the OD flow dimension to quantify the spatial dispersion and centrality of commuting behaviors. These indicators collectively reflect both static morphological characteris-tics and dynamic functional interactions. To integrate the diverse measures, all indicators are first standardized, followed by Principal Component Analy-sis (PCA) to extract key components and compute scores for each dimension. These scores are then weighted and aggregated into a composite structural score for each city. Subsequently, K-means clustering is employed to clas-sify cities into three structural types: monocentric, uniform, and polycentric. The definitions of the metrics are presented as follows: 41 Gini Coefficient : Measures the level of imbalance in data distribution. It evaluates how evenly population, commuting volume, and commuting dis-tance are distributed across a city. A higher Gini value indicates greater imbalance, suggesting a tendency toward monocentric urban structure. It is computed as: G =

PNi=1 

PNj=1 |Xi − Xj |

2N 2 ¯X , (B.1) where Xi represents the value of region i in a given dimension (e.g., popu-lation, commuting volume, or commuting distance), ¯X is the average value across all regions, and N is the total number of regions. A Gini coefficient ap-proaching 0 indicates a relatively balanced distribution, implying a polycen-tric urban structure, while values approaching 1 indicate high concentration, reflecting a monocentric form. 

Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) : A key measure of concentration used to assess spatial clustering of urban functions. Values closer to 1 indicate a more monocentric pattern. It can be expressed as: HHI =

> N

X

> i=1

Xi

PNj=1 Xj

!2

, (B.2) where Xi represents the value of region i in a given dimensio (e.g., population, commuting volume, or commuting distance) and N is the total number of re-gions. HHI close to 1 indicates concentration in a few regions (monocentric), while values near 0 suggest polycentricity. 

Maximum Flow Share Ratio (MFS) : Measures the dominance of the largest commuting volume or distance in the city. It is defined as: MFS = max( Xi)

PNj=1 Xj

, (B.3) where max( Xi) is the maximum commuting volume or distance, and PNj=1 Xj

is the corresponding total of that variable. Higher values indicate monocen-tricity, whereas lower values indicate polycentricity. 

Maximum Betweenness Centrality (MBC) : Assesses the impor-tance of key nodes in the urban network. It is formulated as: MBC = max X

> s̸=i̸=t

σst (i)

σst 

!

, (B.4) 42 where σst is the total number of shortest paths between s and t, and σst (i)

is the count passing through node i. Higher values indicate stronger mono-centricity. 

Pareto Exponent : Describes the degree of imbalance under the assump-tion of a power-law distribution. It is calculated as: 

α = 11 −    

> PNi=1 log Pi
> Nlog Pmax

, (B.5) where Pi is the population of region i, and Pmax is the population of the largest region. Higher α indicates monocentricity, lower α suggests polycentricity. 

Primacy Index: The Primacy Ratio is an important indicator used to measure the relative dominance of the largest region within a city. It is calculated as the ratio of the population in the largest region to the combined population of the second, third, and fourth largest regions: PI = P1

P2 + P3 + P4

, (B.6) where P1 denotes the population of the largest region, and P2, P3, and P4 rep-resent the populations of the next three largest regions, respectively. Higher PI indicates a highly centralized urban structure dominated by a single core region. In contrast, lower PI suggests a more balanced population distribu-tion and a tendency toward a polycentric urban form. 

Appendix C. Inference Time Analysis Under Different City Scales 

Diffusion models rely on multi-step iterative sampling, which usually leads to higher inference overhead. To evaluate the practicality of the proposed method in large-scale urban scenarios, we conduct a quantitative analysis of inference time under different city scales, represented by the number of nodes 

N .Specifically, we compare the average inference time of three models: SEDAN (the proposed method), WEDAN (a representative diffusion-based baseline), and GMEL (a representative regression-based model). For the diffusion mod-els SEDAN and WEDAN, accelerated sampling is performed using DDIM, with the number of sampling steps set to K = 100 . In the experiments, we record the average inference time required for a single forward inference on each city. 43 0 200 400 600 800  

> Number of nodes (N)
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> Mean inference time (s)
> SEDAN
> WEDAN
> GMEL Fig. C.11. The inference time under different city nodes.

As shown in Fig. C.11, the inference time of all three models increases as the city scale grows. Among them, GMEL exhibits the slowest growth in inference time and consistently maintains the lowest computational cost. In contrast, SEDAN and WEDAN show similar growth trends, and their inference time is noticeably higher than that of GMEL. For small-scale cities, the difference in inference time among the three models is relatively minor. However, when the number of nodes becomes larger, the diffusion-based models, namely SEDAN and WEDAN, require substantially more inference time than the regression-based model GMEL. Overall, although diffusion models involve multi-step sampling, DDIM ac-celeration keeps the inference time of SEDAN within an acceptable range even for large-scale cities. Considering its advantages in generation quality and structural consistency, the additional computational cost remains ac-ceptable for applications such as offline OD generation, urban planning, and transportation analysis. 

Appendix D. Hyperparameter Analysis 

To examine the effectiveness and robustness of the model configuration, we analyze two key hyperparameters: the number of attention layers in the 44 2 3 4 5 6        

> Number of Attention Layers
> 0.50
> 0.53
> 0.55
> 0.58
> 0.60
> 0.62
> 0.65
> CPC ↑
> (a) CPC
> 23456
> Number of Attention Layers
> 20.00
> 30.00
> 40.00
> 50.00
> 60.00
> 70.00
> RMSE ↓
> (b) RMSE
> 23456
> Number of Attention Layers
> 0.04
> 0.06
> 0.08
> 0.10
> 0.12
> 0.14
> ODflow JSD ↓
> (c) ODflow JSD

Fig. D.12. Hyperparameter study on the number of attention layers. 200 500 1000 1500       

> Diffusion Steps
> 0.50
> 0.53
> 0.55
> 0.58
> 0.60
> 0.62
> 0.65
> CPC ↑
> (a) CPC
> 200 500 1000 1500
> Diffusion Steps
> 20.00
> 30.00
> 40.00
> 50.00
> 60.00
> 70.00
> RMSE ↓
> (b) RMSE
> 200 500 1000 1500
> Diffusion Steps
> 0.04
> 0.06
> 0.08
> 0.10
> 0.12
> 0.14
> ODflow JSD ↓
> (c) ODflow JSD

Fig. D.13. Hyperparameter study on the number of diffusion steps. 

Graph Transformer and the number of diffusion steps. Model performance is evaluated using CPC, RMSE, and ODFlow JSD, which reflect OD pair consistency, numerical accuracy, and distributional similarity, respectively. The results are shown in Fig. D.12 and Fig. D.13. For the Graph Transformer, the number of attention layers is varied from 2 to 6. As shown in Fig. D.12, increasing the number of layers from 2 to 4 leads to consistent improvements across all metrics, indicating that a moderate model depth is more effective for capturing spatial dependencies. When the number of layers is further increased to 5 or 6, the performance no longer improves and exhibits slight fluctuations. Therefore, four attention layers are adopted as the default setting. We further study the effect of diffusion steps by setting them to 200, 500, 1000, and 1500. As shown in Fig. D.13, the model performs best at 1000 steps, achieving the highest CPC and the lowest RMSE and ODFlow JSD. Further increasing the number of diffusion steps to 1500 yields no additional gain and instead introduces slight fluctuations. Considering the additional computational overhead of longer sampling, 1000 diffusion steps are selected as the default configuration. 45 Appendix E. SHAP-based Marginal Contribution Analysis 

This appendix describes how we quantify the marginal contribution of regional attributes to the generated OD flows. 

Appendix E.1. Explanation Target and Background Construction 

Let Xi ∈ RM denote the attribute vector (demographics and POIs) of a target region ri. The model output f (Xi) represents the predicted average outflow under the fixed urban context. SHAP quantifies feature importance by measuring how the prediction changes when a feature is treated as missing. Directly setting missing fea-tures to zero leads to unrealistic, out-of-distribution inputs. To address this, we adopt a background sampling strategy. Specifically, we construct a global background dataset B by sampling node attributes from multiple cities. When a feature is withheld, it is replaced with a value drawn from B,ensuring that perturbed inputs remain within the empirical data distribution. 

Appendix E.2. KernelSHAP Approximation 

Exact computation of Shapley values requires evaluating all 2M feature subsets, which is infeasible. We therefore employ KernelSHAP to approxi-mate the solution. Let z′ ∈ { 0, 1}M be a binary mask indicating which features are retained. For z′ 

> j

= 1 , feature j keeps its original value; otherwise, it is replaced by a background sample. The corresponding expected model output is approxi-mated as: 

fx(z′) ≈ Ez∼B [f (Xi ⊙ z′ + z ⊙ (1 − z′))] ,

where ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication. KernelSHAP fits the following additive surrogate model: 

g(z′) = ϕ0 +

> M

X

> j=1

ϕj z′ 

> j

,

where ϕ0 is the baseline output and ϕj denotes the SHAP value of feature j.The parameters are estimated by minimizing the weighted squared loss: 

L = X

> z′∈Z

πx(z′) ( fx(z′) − g(z′)) 2 ,

46 where Z is the set of sampled masks, and the Shapley kernel weight is defined as: 

πx(z′) = M − 1

  M

> |z′|

|z′|(M − | z′|).

In practice, KernelSHAP samples feature masks, evaluates the model on background-replaced inputs, and solves the resulting weighted regression to estimate feature contributions. 47