Title: SIFT: Self-Imagination Fine-Tuning for Physically Plausible Motion in Video Diffusion Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.27741v1

Published Time: Mon, 29 Jun 2026 00:26:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# SIFT: Self-Imagination Fine-Tuning for Physically Plausible Motion in Video Diffusion Models 

Ruoyu Wang 1, Jialun Liu 2⋆†, Huayang Huang 1, Haibin Huang 2, Jiepeng Wang 2, Chi Zhang 2, Xuelong Li 2, and Yu Wu 3† 

> 1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University  

> 2

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, China Telecom (TeleAI)  

> 3

School of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University 

Abstract. Recent advances in video diffusion models have greatly im-proved visual fidelity, yet their generated motions often violate physical plausibility. We observe a common kinematic failure, “motion entangle-ment”, the unintended coupling of independent motion sources, such as camera movement and object motion. We identify that this issue stems from data bias and the reconstruction-based training design of diffusion models. Training on noisy videos that still retain coarse motion cues in-advertently encourages the model to replicate existing motion without an incentive to learn how to model kinematically-grounded motions. To ad-dress this, we propose a Self-Imagination Fine-Tuning (SIFT) paradigm, which enables the model to learn from its own generated videos rather than directly reconstructing real ones, breaking the reconstruction short-cut. We further employ motion-aware discriminative supervision and a progressive hard-case replay strategy to stabilize and accelerate learning. By leveraging freely-generated text prompts, our method can densely cover a broad motion space, including rare or finely-disentangled scenar-ios that would be costly to collect as video data. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach substantially improves the physical real-ism, motion disentanglement, and controllability of generated videos. 

Keywords: Text-to-Video Generation · Motion Entanglement · Video Diffusion Models · Self-Imagination Fine-Tuning 

# 1 Introduction 

While Video Diffusion Models (VDMs) [21,27,35,37,54,66,71] have achieved remarkable visual fidelity and semantic consistency, the physical plausibility of their generated motions remains a fundamental challenge. Existing efforts [3,25, 33,51] largely center on dynamics , such as gravity, collisions, and fluid mechanics. In this work, we study a complementary yet highly visible failure from a kinemat-ics perspective: Motion Entanglement . This phenomenon refers to the model’s  

> ⋆

Project leader  

> †

Corresponding authors   

> arXiv:2606.27741v1 [cs.CV] 26 Jun 2026 2R. Wang et al.
> Fig. 1: Illustration of Motion Entanglement. The first row shows the input conditions, and the last row visualizes the generated trajectories where red indicates physically implausible relative motion. Note that camera-control methods take the camera tra-jectory and the first frame as extra conditions, while the others are purely text-to-video.

inability to independently control and disentangle motions originating from dis-tinct sources, such as camera movement versus object motion. Fundamentally, this reflects a failure to preserve independent reference frames and accurately model relative motion. As illustrated in Fig. 1, this issue is pervasive across commercial models (Veo3 [16], Kling AI [28]), open-source models (Wan [54]), and even models with explicit camera (CameraCtrl [18]) or trajectory (Wan-Move [10]) controls. For example, when the camera is supposed to orbit around a stationary object, the generated video frequently shows the object drifting as well. Conversely, if the object moves but the camera should remain fixed, the camera often unintentionally tracks the object. Although individual frames look realistic, their kinematically flawed relative trajectories reveal a profound lack of structural motion understanding in existing VDMs. Beyond perceptual realism, such kinematic entanglement severely undermines the utility of VDMs as world simulators for downstream applications like autonomous driving, where strict decoupling of ego-motion and environmental dynamics is essential. 

Why does motion entanglement arise? We attribute this phenomenon to two main factors. First, a pronounced data-induced bias exists : real-world videos are largely composed of scenes where camera and object motions co-occur, and large-scale datasets [2, 9, 24, 41, 56, 58] lack explicit annotations that distinguish their contributions. Consequently, models learn spurious statistical correlations, treating these independent kinematic variables as inherently linked. Second, the training paradigm of VDMs inherently limits learning of kinematic reasoning .VDMs are trained to reconstruct a clean video from a noisy counterpart us-ing pixel-level objectives like MSE loss. However, even a heavily noised video still preserves substantial residual structural and temporal cues [22, 39, 57, 61]. SIFT 3

This creates a “reconstruction shortcut”: the model learns to replicate preexist-ing motion patterns inherited from the noisy input rather than inferring kine-matically correct dynamics from the textual prompt from scratch. This renders the models inherently insensitive to motion semantics. Meanwhile, the pixel-level reconstruction objective further biases learning toward appearance fidelity. Each pixel’s temporal displacement can stem from both camera-induced scene movement and object-intrinsic motion, but the loss only enforces accurate RGB matching. Thus, the model learns to replicate the overall visual distribution rather than disentangling the underlying kinematic reference frames. 

Why traditional fine-tuning fails? A seemingly straightforward solution would be to perform supervised fine-tune (SFT) on additional motion-decoupled video data. However, such data is extremely scarce, and curating a dataset to cover the full diversity of real-world motion scenarios would require prohibitive data engineering efforts. More fundamentally, SFT inherits the same flaws as pretraining: the denoising shortcut and pixel-level reconstruction bias remain intact. This demonstrates that the motion is being inherited from the input data, not inferred from the semantics of the prompt, rendering standard SFT ineffective for teaching true motion reasoning. To overcome these limitations, we introduce a novel paradigm shift from reconstruction-based training to imagination-based learning. Our Self-Imagination Fine-Tuning (SIFT) framework aims to enable the model to learn to understand, correct, and model motion from its own generated videos, rather than merely copying motion patterns from real videos that are inherently physically correct. To achieve this, we discard real video inputs and force the model to generate videos from randomly initialized noise, guided solely by textual prompts. This completely removes the input reconstruction shortcut, compelling the model to derive kinematic relationships strictly from semantic intent. Additionally, we replace the pixel-level reconstruction objective with motion-aware discrimina-tive supervision to refine its motion generation toward kinematically consistent dynamics. To further stabilize training and improve learning efficiency, we intro-duce a progressive hard-case replay strategy that gradually exposes the model to increasingly difficult self-imagined samples. Crucially, the text prompts can be freely generated by large language models to densely cover diverse and even rare motion scenarios without requiring paired or motion-decoupled video data. Experiments demonstrate that our method significantly improves the physical plausibility and disentanglement of generated motion. In summary, our contributions are as follows: 

– We identify and analyze the Motion Entanglement in video diffusion models, revealing how their current training pipeline limits learning kinematically-grounded motion. 

– We propose a novel self-imagination training paradigm that removes the reconstruction shortcut and enables learning of physically consistent, disen-tangled motion from textual descriptions. 4 R. Wang et al. 

– We conduct extensive experiments demonstrating that our framework sig-nificantly improves motion realism and relative dynamics, without requiring motion-decoupled video-text data. 

# 2 Related Work 

Text-to-Video Generation. Text-to-video (T2V) generation has undergone rapid development in recent years, with diffusion models emerging as the pre-dominant backbone. Early video diffusion models [4, 7, 8, 17, 19, 22, 26] typically “inflate” 2D generative models into the video domain by directly adding tem-poral attention layers to the U-Net architecture of pre-trained text-to-image models (T2I) [42, 45–47] to achieve inter-frame coherence. Despite their simplic-ity and efficiency, these methods often suffer from limited temporal modeling capacity, leading to issues like frame flicker, motion jitter, or inconsistent object evolution over time. A major shift came with the advent of Diffusion Trans-formers (DiTs) [43], which replaced the U-Net’s backbone with a full trans-former architecture to enable 3D full attention. Benefiting from this architec-tural innovation and advances in large-scale training, recent DiT-based T2V models [21, 27, 35, 37, 38, 54, 66, 71] have achieved remarkable breakthroughs in visual-fidelity, generating high-resolution videos with detailed textures, accurate semantic alignment to text prompts, and improved temporal smoothness. Nev-ertheless, current T2V methods often struggle with physically consistent motion dynamics. This limitation highlights that visual fidelity and semantic alignment alone are insufficient for generating truly realistic and controllable videos; a deeper, physically-grounded motion understanding is required. 

Physics-Grounded Video Generation. Although video generation models have made significant progress in visual quality, a fundamental challenge is be-coming increasingly prominent: the generated dynamic content often lacks phys-ical rationality [3, 25, 40, 70]. The research community is trying to solve this problem from multiple directions, though most existing efforts primarily focus on dynamics . (1) Simulation-driven generation [33, 51, 62, 69] integrates explicit physical simulation (rigid-body, elastodynamics, material modeling) with gen-erative video rendering. For instance, PhysGen [33] simulates the rigid-body motion and interactions of each instance based on Newton’s Laws and physical constraints. (2) LLM-guided or semantic-planning approaches [29, 36, 63, 65, 68] leverage large language models or motion planning modules to script object tra-jectories or physical interactions, which are then used to condition the video gen-eration model. While both directions mark important progress toward physical realism, they typically inject external physical knowledge or simulate dynamics beforehand, treating the generative video model merely as a renderer that trans-lates pre-computed trajectories into pixels. Furthermore, they largely overlook the fundamental kinematic failures inherent in the models’ underlying reference frames. In contrast, our work shifts the focus to kinematics, endowing VDMs with internalized physical reasoning to resolve motion entanglement. We train SIFT 5

models to imagine and synthesize motion directly from semantic intent, without relying on external physics engines or pre-simulated trajectories. 

# 3 Method 

3.1 Preliminaries 

Text-to-video (T2V) generation aims to synthesize high-quality videos that are semantically aligned with user prompts. Most state-of-the-art approaches build on diffusion models, which generate videos by iteratively denoising a latent representation conditioned on a text prompt p. During training, noise ϵ is added to the real video x0 sampled from the training dataset to produce a noisy version 

xt. For instance, in standard discrete diffusion models (e.g., DDPMs [20,48,49]), this process is formulated as: 

xt = √αt x0 + √1 − αt ϵ, ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ), (1) where αt is cumulative noise schedule. Alternatively, Flow Matching-based mod-els [13, 32, 34] instead define a linear interpolation between the data and noise: 

xt = (1 − t) x0 + t ϵ, t ∈ [0 , 1] . (2) The diffusion model fθ denoises xt by predicting ϵ, x0, or a velocity field v,but in practice these variants typically share a pixel-level MSE training objective: 

LMSE = Ex0,ϵ,t 

h

∥fθ (xt, t, p ) − yt∥2i

, (3) where yt denotes the corresponding target (noise, video, vector field). As we will demonstrate, this objective encourages accurate low-level signal reconstruction, but it does not directly enforce reasoning about the underlying motion structure. 

3.2 Motivation 

Recent studies [5, 22, 39, 57, 61] have demonstrated that noisy inputs in diffu-sion models retain substantial residual information from the original data. This residual information acts as a “reconstruction shortcut” during training, allow-ing the model to recover the clean video by replicating preexisting motion rather than by reasoning from the conditioning signals (e.g., textual prompts). This ef-fect is particularly pronounced in pre-trained diffusion models, which already possess strong low-level reconstruction abilities. To verify this hypothesis, we conduct a simple diagnostic experiment inspired by Videojam [6]. Specifically, we evaluate a pretrained Wan2.1-T2V-1.3B [54] model under four distinct input settings to assess how sensitive its reconstruction behavior is to different conditioning factors: 

– (i) Normal : the original video with its correct prompt; 

– (ii) Prompt Mismatched : the original video with an unrelated prompt; 

– (iii) Frame Shuffled : a temporally shuffled video with the correct prompt; 6 R. Wang et al.  

> Fig. 2: MSE loss curves of four input settings. This experiment analyzes pretrained diffusion model behavior in the training setting (one-step prediction). Because the loss is dominated by shortcut cues in the noisy input, it is largely insensitive to prompt and frame-order perturbations. This explains why standard SFT is ineffective for learning physically plausible motion generation and motivating our Self-Imagination paradigm.

– (iv) Temporal Restoration : a shuffled video with the correct prompt, with reconstruction loss computed against the original temporally coherent video. In each case, we add random noise levels t ∈ [0 , 1] (corresponding to 0-1000 diffusion timesteps) to 1,000 video-text pairs and compute the reconstruction loss (velocity prediction for Wan) at each timestep. As shown in Fig. 2, the first three settings yield almost identical loss curves, indicating that the model relies predominantly on the residual information in the noisy input rather than the text prompt or meaningful temporal order. In contrast, setting (iv) yields significantly higher losses, suggesting that the model has difficulty addressing the temporal dynamics when the prompt strongly contradicts the residual motion cues inherent in the noisy input. These results reveal that the model behaves largely as a pixel-level refiner rather than a physically grounded generator. Such reliance on reconstruction shortcuts fundamentally limits the effectiveness of conventional supervised fine-tuning (SFT), which may require massive data yet still fails to improve motion understanding. This motivates us to break the reconstruction shortcut and force the model to learn motion modeling from prompts, which we achieve through our proposed self-imagination fine-tuning. 

3.3 Self-Imagination Fine-tuning 

This section presents an overview of our method. The pipeline is shown in Fig. 3, and pseudocode is provided in Algorithm 1. For clarity, the VAE en-coder/decoder and classifier-free guidance (CFG) are omitted. Compared to standard reconstruction-based training of diffusion models, we discard real video inputs and replace them with pure Gaussian noise. Therefore, SIFT 7 

> Fig. 3: Pipeline comparison between traditional diffusion model training (top) and our proposed self-imagination fine-tuning (bottom).

the model needs to imagine the video and construct motion solely from textual prompts that specify scene content and motion relations. These text prompts, which can be freely produced by large language models (e.g., GPT [23]), pro-vide an unlimited source of training scenarios spanning diverse and even rare combinations of relative motions that are difficult to obtain from real videos. To encourage the imagined motions to be physically plausible, we replace the primary reconstruction objective in the self-imagination branch with motion-aware discriminative supervision, while retaining a lightweight MSE term on real video-text pairs to preserve visual quality. Through this process, the model learns to infer and synthesize coherent, physically plausible motion dynamics directly from semantic intent. In practice, since diffusion models establish global motion structure primarily during early denoising stages [31, 60], we restrict training to high-noise regimes and perform only a few denoising steps (e.g., 3 steps) from pure noise. This allows us to efficiently probe the model’s motion imagination where it matters most, significantly reducing computational cost compared to full-sequence generation. 

3.4 Decoupled Motion Feedback 

To provide motion-specific supervision rather than low-level appearance guid-ance, we train motion classifiers Cϕ to categorize each video into four motion types: camera-only motion , object-only motion , both in motion , and both static .Since the motion type for each self-generated video is known from its original 8 R. Wang et al. 

Algorithm 1 Self-Imagination Fine-Tuning 

Require: Pretrained VDM fθ , motion classifiers Cϕ (R3D & SlowFast), prompt gen-erator, real batch Dreal , Hard Case Buffer B

1: Initialize B ← ∅ 

2: for each training iteration s do 

3: Lmotion ← 0

4: Generate a batch of prompts {(pi, c i)}

5: for each (pi, c i) in the batch do 

6: xT ∼ N (0 , I )

7: ˆx0 ← f denoise  

> θ

(xT , p i)

8: cpred ← C ϕ(ˆ x0)

9: Lmotion ← L motion − I(ci)⊤ log cpred 

10: if arg max( cpred )̸ = ci then 

11: Add (pi, c i) to B

12: end if 

13: end for 

14: Sample a real batch and compute LMSE 

15: Ltotal ← λLmotion + LMSE 

16: Update θ ← θ − η∇θ Ltotal 

17: Sample cases from B with probability ps = min(1 , s/S warmup ) and replay them 18: end for 

LLM-generated prompt, we obtain ground-truth labels automatically without manual annotation. To mitigate model bias and capture complementary induc-tive priors, we employ two heterogeneous classifiers. The first is a 3D-ResNet (R3D) [53], which treats spatial and temporal dimensions symmetrically through unified 3D convolutions, making it adept at modeling short-term local motion coherence. The second is a SlowFast network [11], which explicitly factorizes temporal and spatial processing into dual pathways operating at different frame rates, one focusing on detailed spatial semantics and the other on high-frequency motion dynamics. This architectural dichotomy ensures our motion feedback en-compasses both specialized and unified temporal understandings. During training the classifiers, we explicitly simulate the noisy inference of SIFT: adding heavy noise to clean videos ( t ∈ [900 , 1000) ) and running the same one-step denoising to obtain predicted ˆx0. Classifiers are trained on these noisy, regenerated ˆx0, which match the distribution they see when supervising SIFT and ensure robustness to noise and artifacts. On a held-out validation set constructed under the same noisy supervision distribution, R3D and SlowFast achieve 78.4% and 82.8% accuracy, respectively. To further prevent overfitting to a single classifier, we employ an alternating supervision strategy . Rather than averaging their outputs, we alternate between the two classifiers across different training batches. This ensures the model ben-efits from both spatial and temporal inductive biases. The motion loss is then defined using cross-entropy between the predicted and true motion classes: 

ℓ(ˆ xi, c i) = − I(ci)⊤ log Cϕ(ˆ xi), (4) SIFT 9

where I(c) is the one-hot vector of the ground-truth motion type. 

3.5 Progressive Hard Case Replay 

To further improve stability and maximize learning efficiency, we introduce a progressive hard case replay strategy . The key idea is to gradually expose the model to increasingly difficult motion cases, rather than overwhelming it with hard samples from the beginning. After each imagination step, videos that fail to produce correct motion categories are stored in a hard case buffer B. During the early training phase, these hard samples are temporarily excluded from gradient updates to avoid unstable optimization caused by noisy supervision. As training progresses, hard cases are incorporated into the loss with a gradually increasing participation ps:

ps = min 



1, sSwarmup 



, (5) where s is the current training iteration step and Swarmup is a predefined warm-up period. Formally, let bs denote the current batch and H ⊆ B be the set of hard samples identified by motion classifiers. For each sample i ∈ bs, we draw 

ui ∼ Uniform [0 , 1] , and include it in the loss only if ui ≤ ps. The batch-wise loss is defined as: 

Lmotion = X

> i∈bs

h

1{i / ∈H} + 1{i∈H}1{ui≤ps}

i

ℓ(ˆ xi, c i), (6) where ℓ(ˆ xi, c i) is the motion classification loss for the generated video ˆxi with ground-truth motion label ci.Meanwhile, we periodically replay samples from the buffer to reinforce chal-lenging motion patterns. This progressive replay strategy allows the model to first stabilize its understanding on borderline cases before tackling the complex motion dynamics, leading to more robust and stable convergence. 

# 4 Experiment 

4.1 Experimental Setup Dataset. To train motion classifiers, we first construct a dataset comprising 4,000 videos, evenly distributed across four motion categories: camera-only mo-tion, object-only motion, both in motion, and both static. The videos are manu-ally filtered and collected from existing large-scale video datasets [12,14,30,41,64] and open-source websites [44]. Each video is annotated with two types of cap-tions: (1) general content descriptions generated using Qwen-VL-2.5 [1], and (2) detailed camera movement descriptions generated by a specialized model [30] fine-tuned on Qwen-VL-2.5 with camera-specific data. 

Benchmark. For testing, we focus on the two critical categories that require disentanglement: camera-only motion and object-only motion. Our full test set 10 R. Wang et al.                                                                     

> Table 1: Quantitative comparison of our method with baselines across VLM and hu-man evaluations. Metrics include Semantic Adherence (SA) and Physical Commonsense (PC). Our method achieves the highest scores in all categories.
> Model Setting VLM Score ( ↑)Human Score ( ↑)Camera-only Object-only Camera-only Object-only SA PC SA PC SA PC SA PC
> Wan [54] 3.58 4.06 3.80 3.60 3.00 2.79 2.91 2.75 + SFT 3.94 4.73 4.32 4.30 3.26 3.53 2.91 2.43 + SIFT (Ours) 4.80 4.93 4.75 4.72 3.89 4.24 3.98 3.84
> CogVideoX [66] 3.95 3.10 3.75 2.81 3.51 3.20 2.73 2.39 + SFT 4.68 4.32 4.25 3.69 3.50 3.10 3.18 2.86 + VideoREPA [70] 4.53 4.05 4.00 3.50 3.34 4.05 2.20 2.60 + SIFT (Ours) 4.89 4.84 4.38 4.25 3.88 4.25 3.75 3.68
> Fig. 4: Human preference study results, showing the winning rate of our method vs. baselines. Blue bars indicate Semantic Adherence (SA) and yellow bars indicate Phys-ical Commonsense (PC).

comprises 100 test prompts, each following a precise two-clause format: {con-tent prompt} {camera prompt}. The camera clause always begins with “The camera...” and encompasses a diverse set of 12 motion templates (e.g., pan, tilt, truck, orbit, etc.) and 5 static templates. For moving object scenarios, content prompts are sampled from the motion binding subset of T2V-CompBench [50]. For static object scenarios, content prompts are generated using Gemini-Pro-Vision-1.5 [52], covering a comprehensive range of entities including vehicles, common objects, and living beings. 

Evaluation Metrics. As the first work to investigate motion entanglement in videos, we design evaluation metrics based on VideoPhy [3] and PhysCtrl [55] with necessary adaptations. We employ both a vision-language model (VLM) and human evaluations to assess each video on 1-5 scale across two dimensions: (1) SIFT 11  

> Fig. 5: Qualitative comparison on the Wan backbone. SIFT better preserves prompt-specified relative motion and temporal consistency than other baselines.

Semantic Adherence (SA) : measures how well the video content aligns with the text prompt, particularly whether the generated motions match the prompt; (2) 

Physical Commonsense (PC) : measures whether the observed motion follows the physics laws in the real world. Additionally, we run a pairwise human preference study : for each prompt, we present two videos (e.g., our method versus a baseline) and ask evaluators which video better satisfies SA / PC. 

Implementation Details. All experiments are conducted on 8 NVIDIA H100 GPUs. We adopt two pre-trained video diffusion models as backbones: Wan2.1-T2V-1.3B [54] and CogVideoX [66]. Both models use an identical learning rate of 

5e−6 and are optimized for 1,000 steps with a batch size of 1. For evaluation, we use InternVideo2.5 [59] as the VLM evaluator. During the self-imagination phase, video generation proceeds through timesteps t = 1000 , 980 , 960 . The Progressive Hard Case Replay warm-up period Twarmup is set to 500 iterations, with hard case replay performed every 10 batches. The motion-aware discriminative loss weight is set to 0.01. Alternating supervision between motion classifiers is applied every 25 batches. 

4.2 Comparison with Existing Baselines Baselines. We conduct extensive comparative experiments on two open source video diffusion models: Wan2.1 [54] and CogVideoX [66]. The compared methods include: (1) Original : the base pre-trained models without any modification; (2) 

SFT : supervised fine-tuning on our human-collected dataset of 4,000 motion-decoupled videos; (3) VideoREPA [70] : a method that applies REPA [67] to video diffusion model, distilling general physical understanding from video foundation models by aligning token-level relations; and (4) our proposed SIFT .12 R. Wang et al.  

> Fig. 6: Qualitative comparison on the CogVideoX backbone. SIFT produces more coherent object interactions and more physically plausible relative motion than others.

Quantitative Evaluation. As summarized in Tab. 1, both VLM-based and human evaluations across two backbone models demonstrate that our method achieves the best performance in both Semantic Adherence (SA) and Physical Commonsense (PC). The SFT baseline brings only limited gains and even un-derperforms the original model in some human evaluations (e.g., Wan + SFT obtains a PC score of 2.43, versus 2.75 for vanilla Wan). This supports our claim that conventional SFT helps the model imitate motion distributions present in the data but fails to cultivate genuine physical reasoning. The model tends to memorize statistical correlations of training data but cannot generalize to novel scenarios, often generating kinematically inconsistent motions that human raters can easily spot. VideoREPA [70] enhances temporal stability by distilling general physical knowledge via feature alignment but lacks explicit supervision for motion disentanglement. As a result, improvements in PC metrics are mod-est, with smoother motion visuals yet frequent errors in relative dynamics (e.g., camera versus object motion). In contrast, our method demonstrates significant improvement across all metrics. By breaking the reconstruction shortcut and learning from self-imagined videos, SIFT compels the model to infer motion directly from semantic prompts, rather than replicating residual motion cues. The motion-aware discriminative supervision and progressive hard-case replay further guide the model to correct mistakes and stabilize learning, leading to ro-bust disentanglement of independent motion sources. Notably, human preference studies in Fig. 4 confirm that SIFT is strongly favored over all baselines, show-ing that our method enhances both the realism and controllability of generated motion without sacrificing semantic fidelity. 

Qualitative Evaluation. The qualitative results between our method and base-lines can be found in Figs. 5 and 6, and they further illustrate the advantages of SIFT. For instance, in the puppy-and-ball scene, SIFT generates natural rela-tive motion and consistent object presence across frames. However, the original SIFT 13 

CogVideoX exhibits unrealistic interactions where the puppy partially merges with the ball; CogVideoX + SFT produces temporal discontinuities with the ball abruptly disappearing; and CogVideoX + VideoREPA fails to generate the ball altogether. These artifacts demonstrate the limitations of existing approaches in modeling kinematically correct and coherent motion dynamics.            

> Table 2: Comparison with camera-controlled methods. Method SA ↑PC ↑
> CameraCtrl 3.07 3.03 Wan-Move 3.73 3.70 SIFT 4.10 4.30

Camera-controlled Methods. Camera-controlled methods [10, 18] primarily target precise controllability through dense external conditions, such as manually designed trajec-tories and reference first frames, whereas SIFT aims to improve the backbone model’s intrin-sic motion prior under the standard text-to-video setting. For completeness, we report a separate comparison on a camera-only subset in Tab. 2, where we align the inputs as closely as possible: camera poses are specified using a small set of fixed directional tra-jectories, and required reference first frames are generated by Nano Banana [15].                 

> Table 3: Generalization to more complex motion settings.
> Setting Method SA ↑PC ↑
> Multi-object Wan 3.88 3.92 + SIFT 4.50 4.18
> Articulated Wan 3.76 4.04 + SIFT 4.02 4.36
> Long horizon Wan 3.50 3.82 + SIFT 3.88 4.31

Generalization Beyond Basic Mo-tion Disentanglement. Beyond the camera-only and object-only settings in our main benchmark, we further evaluate SIFT on three more chal-lenging motion scenarios: multi-object motion, articulated motion, and long-horizon motion. Each setting contains 50 prompts. For the long-horizon set-ting, each prompt involves at least two sequential motion phases, and the generated videos contain twice as many frames as those in the standard benchmark. As shown in Tab. 3, SIFT consistently improves both semantic adherence and physical commonsense across all three settings. These results suggest that SIFT improves the model’s under-standing of motion, enabling it to achieve better performance in more complex and general scenarios. 

4.3 Ablation Study 

To better understand the contribution of each component of our SIFT, we conducted a comprehensive ablation study, as shown in Tab. 4. All ablations are evaluated on a randomly sampled set of 40 prompts from the test benchmark. 

Self-Imagination Generation. We ablate the self-imagination design by ini-tializing generation from noisy real videos instead of pure noise, while keeping all other components unchanged. As shown in Tab. 4, this variant performs worse in both semantic adherence and physical plausibility. When conditioned on noised real videos, the model exploits residual motion cues, such as coarse 14 R. Wang et al.                        

> Table 4: Ablation study of SIFT components on the Wan using VLM evaluation. SA: semantic adherence; PC: physical commonsense. For a fair and accurate comparison, videos generated from the same prompt by all methods are jointly provided to the VLM for scoring. So scores are relative within each group and should not be directly comparable to those in Tab. 1. Model Variant Camera-only Object-only SA( ↑) PC( ↑) SA( ↑) PC( ↑)(a) Self-Imagination Generation
> w/ Reconstruction Shortcut 3.05 3.55 3.45 3.65
> (b) Alternating Supervision
> w/ Single Classifier (R3D) 3.65 3.55 3.20 3.60 w/ Single Classifier (SlowFast) 3.35 3.25 3.50 3.85
> (c) Progressive Hard Case Replay
> w/o Progressive Hard Case Replay 3.00 3.45 3.35 3.70
> Ours (Full SIFT) 3.85 4.15 3.50 4.00

object trajectories and temporal coherence, to guide reconstruction, bypassing the need to infer motion from text. Moreover, because real videos are inherently kinematically plausible, the model tends to copy motion patterns present in the input rather than learning to infer kinematically plausible motion dynamics. As a result, it fails to develop a robust understanding of motion semantics from language, leading to poorer generalization and reduced motion disentanglement. 

Alternating Supervision. We evaluate our alternating strategy by comparing it against using only a single motion classifier supervision (R3D or SlowFast). As shown in Tab. 4, both single-classifier variants perform worse than our full approach. As illustrated in Fig. 7, training with a single classifier causes its ac-curacy to saturate quickly, indicating overfitting to its own inductive bias. This can mislead the generator to reproduce artifacts favored by that classifier rather than generating physically plausible motion. In contrast, alternating between heterogeneous classifiers prevents overfitting to a fixed inductive prior and en-courages the generator to satisfy complementary motion criteria, resulting in more stable and kinematically coherent motion generation. 

Progressive Hard Case Replay. We ablate this component by removing both the hard case buffer and the progressive scheduling, i.e., exposing the model to hard cases from the beginning of training. As shown in Tab. 4, this variant leads to clear degradation in both physical plausibility and semantic adherence. The performance drop occurs because introducing challenging cases too early injects noisy gradients when the model’s parameters are not yet sufficiently prepared. This disrupts motion learning and even harms overall visual quality, as evidenced by the more significant decline in semantic adherence (SA). In contrast, our progressive strategy allows the model to first master basic motion patterns before tackling more challenging cases, leading to more stable convergence and better SIFT 15 0 200 400 600 800 1000 

> Training Steps
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> Accuracy
> Alternating Supervision
> Single Classifier (SlowFast)

Fig. 7: Accuracy curves of motion classifiers during training of video generative model. 

final performance. Moreover, the hard case replay improves training efficiency, enabling the model to achieve greater improvement within the same number of optimization steps. 

# 5 Conclusion 

In this work, we identify a key kinematic limitation in current video diffusion models, which we term “Motion Entanglement”. We show that this issue arises from data-induced spurious correlations as well as the reconstruction shortcut and objective biases inherent in their training paradigm. These factors prevent models from learning physically grounded motion. To address this, we propose Self-Imagination Fine-Tuning (SIFT), a paradigm shift from reconstruction-based training to imagination-driven learning that initializes generation from random noise. Combined with motion-aware discriminative supervision and a progressive hard-case replay strategy, SIFT enables the model to infer, evaluate, and correct motion dynamics without relying on scarce motion-decoupled data. Extensive experiments on both Wan and CogVideoX demonstrate that SIFT significantly improves physical plausibility and motion disentanglement while preserving semantic fidelity, paving the way toward more realistic and control-lable text-to-video generation. 

Limitations and Future Work. Although the four-way motion taxonomy pro-vides effective supervision for disentangling camera and object motion, it remains coarse. In particular, it does not explicitly model motion direction, magnitude, individual trajectories, or temporal transitions between multiple motion states. This limitation becomes more evident in involving multiple moving entities and complex motion composition scenarios, where a single categorical label may not fully describe the underlying motion structure. In addition, the quality of the feedback depends on the robustness of the motion classifiers, which can be un-certain for ambiguous or severely corrupted self-generated videos. A promising direction is to introduce richer factorized motion representations, such as object-level trajectories, optical flow, or motion fields, and to design more fine-grained feedback for complex interactions and longer temporal horizons. 16 R. Wang et al. 

# References 

1. Bai, S., Chen, K., Liu, X., Wang, J., Ge, W., Song, S., Dang, K., Wang, P., Wang, S., Tang, J., et al.: Qwen2. 5-vl technical report. arXiv (2025) 2. Bain, M., Nagrani, A., Varol, G., Zisserman, A.: Frozen in time: A joint video and image encoder for end-to-end retrieval. In: ICCV. pp. 1728–1738 (2021) 3. Bansal, H., Lin, Z., Xie, T., Zong, Z., Yarom, M., Bitton, Y., Jiang, C., Sun, Y., Chang, K.W., Grover, A.: Videophy: Evaluating physical commonsense for video generation. arXiv (2024) 4. Blattmann, A., Dockhorn, T., Kulal, S., Mendelevitch, D., Kilian, M., Lorenz, D., Levi, Y., English, Z., Voleti, V., Letts, A., et al.: Stable video diffusion: Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv (2023) 5. Burgert, R., Xu, Y., Xian, W., Pilarski, O., Clausen, P., He, M., Ma, L., Deng, Y., Li, L., Mousavi, M., et al.: Go-with-the-flow: Motion-controllable video diffusion models using real-time warped noise. In: CVPR. pp. 13–23 (2025) 6. Chefer, H., Singer, U., Zohar, A., Kirstain, Y., Polyak, A., Taigman, Y., Wolf, L., Sheynin, S.: Videojam: Joint appearance-motion representations for enhanced motion generation in video models. arXiv (2025) 7. Chen, H., Xia, M., He, Y., Zhang, Y., Cun, X., Yang, S., Xing, J., Liu, Y., Chen, Q., Wang, X., et al.: Videocrafter1: Open diffusion models for high-quality video generation. arXiv (2023) 8. Chen, H., Zhang, Y., Cun, X., Xia, M., Wang, X., Weng, C., Shan, Y.: Videocrafter2: Overcoming data limitations for high-quality video diffusion models. In: CVPR. pp. 7310–7320 (2024) 9. Chen, T.S., Siarohin, A., Menapace, W., Deyneka, E., Chao, H.w., Jeon, B.E., Fang, Y., Lee, H.Y., Ren, J., Yang, M.H., et al.: Panda-70m: Captioning 70m videos with multiple cross-modality teachers 10. Chu, R., He, Y., Chen, Z., Zhang, S., Xu, X., Xia, B., Wang, D., Yi, H., Liu, X., Zhao, H., et al.: Wan-move: Motion-controllable video generation via latent trajectory guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.08765 (2025) 11. Feichtenhofer, C., Fan, H., Malik, J., He, K.: Slowfast networks for video recogni-tion. In: ICCV. pp. 6202–6211 (2019) 12. Fu, X., Liu, X., Wang, X., Peng, S., Xia, M., Shi, X., Yuan, Z., Wan, P., Zhang, D., Lin, D.: 3dtrajmaster: Mastering 3d trajectory for multi-entity motion in video generation. arXiv (2024) 13. Geng, Z., Deng, M., Bai, X., Kolter, J.Z., He, K.: Mean flows for one-step generative modeling. arXiv (2025) 14. Gillman, N., Herrmann, C., Freeman, M., Aggarwal, D., Luo, E., Sun, D., Sun, C.: Force prompting: Video generation models can learn and generalize physics-based control signals. arXiv (2025) 15. Google DeepMind: Gemini image — nano banana. https://deepmind.google/ models/gemini-image/ (2025), official model page, accessed 2026-03-03 16. Google DeepMind: Veo 3. https://deepmind.google/models/veo/ (2025) 17. Guo, Y., Yang, C., Rao, A., Liang, Z., Wang, Y., Qiao, Y., Agrawala, M., Lin, D., Dai, B.: Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning. arXiv (2023) 18. He, H., Xu, Y., Guo, Y., Wetzstein, G., Dai, B., Li, H., Yang, C.: Cameractrl: En-abling camera control for text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02101 (2024) SIFT 17 19. Ho, J., Chan, W., Saharia, C., Whang, J., Gao, R., Gritsenko, A., Kingma, D.P., Poole, B., Norouzi, M., Fleet, D.J., et al.: Imagen video: High definition video generation with diffusion models. arXiv (2022) 20. Ho, J., Jain, A., Abbeel, P.: Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. NeurIPS (2020) 21. Hong, W., Ding, M., Zheng, W., Liu, X., Tang, J.: Cogvideo: Large-scale pretrain-ing for text-to-video generation via transformers. arXiv (2022) 22. Hou, C., Chen, Z.: Training-free camera control for video generation. arXiv (2024) 23. Hurst, A., Lerer, A., Goucher, A.P., Perelman, A., Ramesh, A., Clark, A., Ostrow, A., Welihinda, A., Hayes, A., Radford, A., et al.: Gpt-4o system card. arXiv (2024) 24. Ju, X., Gao, Y., Zhang, Z., Yuan, Z., Wang, X., Zeng, A., Xiong, Y., Xu, Q., Shan, Y.: Miradata: A large-scale video dataset with long durations and structured captions. NeurIPS 37 , 48955–48970 (2024) 25. Kang, B., Yue, Y., Lu, R., Lin, Z., Zhao, Y., Wang, K., Huang, G., Feng, J.: How far is video generation from world model: A physical law perspective. arXiv (2024) 26. Khachatryan, L., Movsisyan, A., Tadevosyan, V., Henschel, R., Wang, Z., Navasardyan, S., Shi, H.: Text2video-zero: Text-to-image diffusion models are zero-shot video generators. In: ICCV. pp. 15954–15964 (2023) 27. Kong, W., Tian, Q., Zhang, Z., Min, R., Dai, Z., Zhou, J., Xiong, J., Li, X., Wu, B., Zhang, J., et al.: Hunyuanvideo: A systematic framework for large video generative models. arXiv (2024) 28. Kuaishou: Kling ai. https://app.klingai.com/global/ (2025) 29. Lian, L., Shi, B., Yala, A., Darrell, T., Li, B.: Llm-grounded video diffusion models. arXiv (2023) 30. Lin, Z., Cen, S., Jiang, D., Karhade, J., Wang, H., Mitra, C., Ling, T., Huang, Y., Liu, S., Chen, M., et al.: Towards understanding camera motions in any video. arXiv (2025) 31. Ling, P., Bu, J., Zhang, P., Dong, X., Zang, Y., Wu, T., Chen, H., Wang, J., Jin, Y.: Motionclone: Training-free motion cloning for controllable video generation. arXiv (2024) 32. Lipman, Y., Chen, R.T., Ben-Hamu, H., Nickel, M., Le, M.: Flow matching for generative modeling. arXiv (2022) 33. Liu, S., Ren, Z., Gupta, S., Wang, S.: Physgen: Rigid-body physics-grounded image-to-video generation. In: ECCV. pp. 360–378. Springer (2024) 34. Liu, X., Gong, C., Liu, Q.: Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data with rectified flow. arXiv (2022) 35. Liu, Y., Zhang, K., Li, Y., Yan, Z., Gao, C., Chen, R., Yuan, Z., Huang, Y., Sun, H., Gao, J., et al.: Sora: A review on background, technology, limitations, and opportunities of large vision models. arXiv (2024) 36. Lv, J., Huang, Y., Yan, M., Huang, J., Liu, J., Liu, Y., Wen, Y., Chen, X., Chen, S.: Gpt4motion: Scripting physical motions in text-to-video generation via blender-oriented gpt planning. In: CVPR. pp. 1430–1440 (2024) 37. Ma, G., Huang, H., Yan, K., Chen, L., Duan, N., Yin, S., Wan, C., Ming, R., Song, X., Chen, X., et al.: Step-video-t2v technical report: The practice, challenges, and future of video foundation model. arXiv (2025) 38. Ma, X., Wang, Y., Jia, G., Chen, X., Liu, Z., Li, Y.F., Chen, C., Qiao, Y.: Latte: Latent diffusion transformer for video generation. arXiv (2024) 39. Mao, J., Wang, X., Aizawa, K.: Guided image synthesis via initial image editing in diffusion model. In: ACM Multimedia. pp. 5321–5329 (2023) 18 R. Wang et al. 40. Meng, F., Liao, J., Tan, X., Shao, W., Lu, Q., Zhang, K., Cheng, Y., Li, D., Qiao, Y., Luo, P.: Towards world simulator: Crafting physical commonsense-based benchmark for video generation. arXiv (2024) 41. Nan, K., Xie, R., Zhou, P., Fan, T., Yang, Z., Chen, Z., Li, X., Yang, J., Tai, Y.: Openvid-1m: A large-scale high-quality dataset for text-to-video generation. arXiv (2024) 42. Nichol, A., Dhariwal, P., Ramesh, A., Shyam, P., Mishkin, P., McGrew, B., Sutskever, I., Chen, M.: Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with text-guided diffusion models. arXiv (2021) 43. Peebles, W., Xie, S.: Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In: ICCV. pp. 4195–4205 (2023) 44. Pexels: Pexels – free stock photos, royalty free images & videos. https://www. pexels.com/ (2025), accessed: 2025-11-13 45. Ramesh, A., Dhariwal, P., Nichol, A., Chu, C., Chen, M.: Hierarchical text-conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv (2022) 46. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., Ommer, B.: High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In: CVPR (2022) 47. Saharia, C., Chan, W., Saxena, S., Li, L., Whang, J., Denton, E.L., Ghasemipour, K., Gontijo Lopes, R., Karagol Ayan, B., Salimans, T., et al.: Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding (2022) 48. Song, J., Meng, C., Ermon, S.: Denoising diffusion implicit models. In: ICLR (2021) 49. Song, Y., Sohl-Dickstein, J., Kingma, D.P., Kumar, A., Ermon, S., Poole, B.: Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv (2020) 50. Sun, K., Huang, K., Liu, X., Wu, Y., Xu, Z., Li, Z., Liu, X.: T2v-compbench: A comprehensive benchmark for compositional text-to-video generation. In: CVPR. pp. 8406–8416 (2025) 51. Tan, X., Jiang, Y., Li, X., Zong, Z., Xie, T., Yang, Y., Jiang, C.: Physmotion: Physics-grounded dynamics from a single image. arXiv (2024) 52. Team, G., Georgiev, P., Lei, V.I., Burnell, R., Bai, L., Gulati, A., Tanzer, G., Vin-cent, D., Pan, Z., Wang, S., et al.: Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv (2024) 53. Tran, D., Wang, H., Torresani, L., Ray, J., LeCun, Y., Paluri, M.: A closer look at spatiotemporal convolutions for action recognition. In: CVPR. pp. 6450–6459 (2018) 54. Wan, T., Wang, A., Ai, B., Wen, B., Mao, C., Xie, C.W., Chen, D., Yu, F., Zhao, H., Yang, J., et al.: Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative models. arXiv (2025) 55. Wang, C., Chen, C., Huang, Y., Dou, Z., Liu, Y., Gu, J., Liu, L.: Physctrl: Gener-ative physics for controllable and physics-grounded video generation. arXiv (2025) 56. Wang, Q., Shi, Y., Ou, J., Chen, R., Lin, K., Wang, J., Jiang, B., Yang, H., Zheng, M., Tao, X., et al.: Koala-36m: A large-scale video dataset improving consis-tency between fine-grained conditions and video content. In: CVPR. pp. 8428–8437 (2025) 57. Wang, R., Huang, H., Zhu, Y., Russakovsky, O., Wu, Y.: The silent assistant: Noisequery as implicit guidance for goal-driven image generation. In: ICCV. pp. 17618–17628 (2025) 58. Wang, Y., He, Y., Li, Y., Li, K., Yu, J., Ma, X., Li, X., Chen, G., Chen, X., Wang, Y., et al.: Internvid: A large-scale video-text dataset for multimodal understanding and generation. arXiv (2023) SIFT 19 59. Wang, Y., Li, X., Yan, Z., He, Y., Yu, J., Zeng, X., Wang, C., Ma, C., Huang, H., Gao, J., et al.: Internvideo2. 5: Empowering video mllms with long and rich context modeling. arXiv (2025) 60. Wu, T., Zhang, Y., Wang, X., Zhou, X., Zheng, G., Qi, Z., Shan, Y., Li, X.: Customcrafter: Customized video generation with preserving motion and concept composition abilities. In: AAAI. vol. 39, pp. 8469–8477 (2025) 61. Wu, T., Si, C., Jiang, Y., Huang, Z., Liu, Z.: Freeinit: Bridging initialization gap in video diffusion models. In: ECCV. pp. 378–394. Springer (2024) 62. Xie, T., Zhao, Y., Jiang, Y., Jiang, C.: Physanimator: Physics-guided generative cartoon animation. In: CVPR. pp. 10793–10804 (2025) 63. Xue, Q., Yin, X., Yang, B., Gao, W.: Phyt2v: Llm-guided iterative self-refinement for physics-grounded text-to-video generation. In: CVPR. pp. 18826–18836 (2025) 64. Xue, Z., Zhang, J., Hu, T., He, H., Chen, Y., Cai, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, C., Liu, Y., Li, X., et al.: Ultravideo: High-quality uhd video dataset with comprehensive captions. arXiv (2025) 65. Yang, X., Li, B., Zhang, Y., Yin, Z., Bai, L., Ma, L., Wang, Z., Cai, J., Wong, T.T., Lu, H., et al.: Towards physically plausible video generation via vlm planning. arXiv 

2 (2025) 66. Yang, Z., Teng, J., Zheng, W., Ding, M., Huang, S., Xu, J., Yang, Y., Hong, W., Zhang, X., Feng, G., et al.: Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer. arXiv (2024) 67. Yu, S., Kwak, S., Jang, H., Jeong, J., Huang, J., Shin, J., Xie, S.: Representation alignment for generation: Training diffusion transformers is easier than you think. arXiv (2024) 68. Zhang, K., Xiao, C., Mei, Y., Xu, J., Patel, V.M.: Think before you diffuse: Llms-guided physics-aware video generation. arXiv (2025) 69. Zhang, T., Yu, H.X., Wu, R., Feng, B.Y., Zheng, C., Snavely, N., Wu, J., Freeman, W.T.: Physdreamer: Physics-based interaction with 3d objects via video genera-tion. In: ECCV. pp. 388–406. Springer (2024) 70. Zhang, X., Liao, J., Zhang, S., Meng, F., Wan, X., Yan, J., Cheng, Y.: Videorepa: Learning physics for video generation through relational alignment with foundation models. arXiv (2025) 71. Zheng, Z., Peng, X., Yang, T., Shen, C., Li, S., Liu, H., Zhou, Y., Li, T., You, Y.: Open-sora: Democratizing efficient video production for all. arXiv (2024) SIFT 1

# Overview 

This supplementary material provides additional implementation details, in-cluding the LLMs used for prompt generation and evaluation, together with a full description of our human study setup and additional experimental results that were not included in the main paper. We strongly encourage readers to watch the video , as the key phenomena and improvements are most clearly observable in dynamic motion. 

# A LLM/VLM Implementation Details 

This section provides the detailed settings, prompts, and procedures for all LLM/VLM components used in our work, including (1) VLM-based evaluation, (2) training prompt generation, and (3) testing prompt generation. 

InternVideo2.5 Evaluation. We adopt InternVideo2.5 [59] as an automatic evaluator to assess Semantic Adherence (SA) and Physical Commonsense (PC) of videos generated by all compared methods. To ensure fair comparison, for each prompt, we collect videos from all methods, shuffle their order, and jointly present them to the VLM along with the text prompt. We then prompt Intern-Video2.5 with the following prompt to use it for evaluation: 

Video Evaluation 

You are comparing several versions of the same video scene, each gener-ated by different methods. The order of videos corresponds to: {subdirs} .For each version, rate the video along the following two dimensions, each using a 5-point Likert scale (1 = poor, 5 = excellent). Provide only nu-merical scores and no explanations. 1. Semantic Adherence Rate how well the video matches the prompt: 

– Objects, actions, and events correspond to the prompt (penalize miss-ing or extra elements). 

– Scene layout, background, and interactions align with the prompt. 2. Physical Plausibility Rate how realistic the motions are: 

– Motions are continuous, stable, and physically possible in the real world. 

– Objects move only with plausible causes (no drifting or sudden changes without force). 

GPT-4o Training prompts Generation. We use GPT-4o [23] to generate 10,000 training prompts covering diverse camera-only/object-only motion com-binations. We use the following instruction: 2 R. Wang et al. 

Camera-Only Motion Prompt Generation 

Generate diverse and unique prompts for video generation where only the camera moves. Each prompt must consist of two sentences: 1. A description of a scene with completely stationary subjects (no move-ment). 2. A description of the camera action, starting with “The camera ...”. Requirements: 

– Subjects should be diverse: vehicles, animals, people, objects, furniture, sports equipment, artworks, etc. 

– Camera movements should vary and be selected only from: pan, tilt, zoom, truck, pedestal, dolly, arc, orbit, rotate. 

– Use simple, natural English. Avoid rare or overly technical film terms. 

– Avoid repeating the same subject or camera movement too often. 

Object-Only Motion Prompt Generation 

Generate diverse and unique prompts for video generation where only the subjects move. Each prompt should include: 1. A description of a scene with moving subjects. 2. A description of a completely static camera starting with “The camera”. Requirements: 

– Subjects should be highly diverse: animals, people, vehicles, objects, etc. 

– Subject movements can be active (run, move, fly, drive, rotate, etc.) or passive (fall, flow, swing, being thrown, drift, etc.). 

– Ensure no two prompts are similar in subject or movement type. 

Gemini-Pro-Vision-1.5 Testing prompt Generation. To avoid train–test contamination and to ensure fair evaluation, we use a different modelGemini Pro Vision 1.5 [52], to generate testing prompts. We request the LLM to produce prompts using the same instructions as GPT-4o. 

# B More Results 

For clearer visualization and deeper qualitative understanding, we provide extensive video results in the supplementary materials. SIFT 3 

> Fig. S1: Illustration of the user interface used for evaluating video generations.

# C Human Evaluation Details 

We conduct two complementary forms of human evaluation to both Semantic Adherence (SA) and Physical Commonsense (PC): (1) Likert-scale scoring, and (2) pairwise preference judgments. In the Likert-scale evaluation, participants are presented with a text prompt and all corresponding videos from compared methods (in randomized order), and are asked to rate each video individually on a 1–5 scale for both SA and PC. In the pairwise evaluation, participants are shown two videos (ours vs. a baseline) alongside the prompt and must select which one better satisfies SA and PC, respectively. The evaluation interface is illustrated in Figure S1. We collected 20 complete responses, with each participant evaluating 16 video groups (i.e., 20 participants 

× 16 comparisons). For the Likert-scale evaluation, we report the average scores across all participants. For the pairwise evaluation, we report the average winning percentage of our method over each baseline. 

# D Failure Cases  

> Fig. S2: An example of failure cases.

While SIFT substantially mitigates the physically im-plausible coupling between camera and object motions, we observe that the camera may move in the wrong direc-tion. For instance, as shown in Fig. S2, when a prompt spec-ifies a “clockwise" camera tra-jectory, the camera may execute a counter-clockwise movement instead. This failure appears to stem from limitations in the backbone model’s directional semantic grounding. 4 R. Wang et al. 

# E More Results 

For clearer visualization and deeper qualitative understanding, we provide extensive video results in the supplementary materials.