Title: The Silent Brush: Evaluating Artistic Style Leakage in AI Art Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.17500v1

Published Time: Tue, 19 May 2026 01:42:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
# The Silent Brush: Evaluating Artistic Style Leakage in AI Art Generation 

Ninad Joshi 

TCS Research, India 

joshi.ninad@tcs.com 

Ashutosh Ranjan 

TCS Research, India 

ashutosh.ranjan2@tcs.com 

Vivek Srivastava 

TCS Research, India 

srivastava.vivek2@tcs.com 

Shirish Karande 

TCS Research, India 

shirish.karande@tcs.com 

Abstract 

Generative text-to-image models are typically trained on large-scale web-scraped datasets that include diverse visual content such as copyrighted and stylistically distinctive artworks, raising concerns about ownership, attribution, and the un-intended reuse of protected visual expressions. A key issue is that models can learn stylistic patterns from this data and reproduce them in generated outputs without any explicit reference in the prompt. We refer to this phenomenon as 

The Silent Brush , where such learned styles reappear even when they are not requested. Existing evaluation methods mainly focus on near-duplicate retrieval or membership inference and do not account for this form of unintended stylistic resurfacing across prompts. To address these gaps, we first formulate guiding principles for evaluation of the silent brush . We then introduce Art Arena , an evaluation protocol that measures how strongly artworks are encoded, how they interact, and how frequently their stylistic traits reappear in generated outputs without explicit mention in prompts. We evaluate Art Arena on widely used text-to-image diffusion models, including Stable Diffusion v1.5, Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL), and SANA-1.5, and design it to generalize across text-to-image gen-erative systems. Our results show that The Silent Brush arises from differences in representational strength and interaction dynamics between artworks, leading to asymmetric blending in model generations. Code and evaluation resources are available at: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/ArtArena-EBE4 .

1 Introduction 

Every artwork carries a unique stylistic fingerprint shaped by choices in color, composition, and technique [Jafarpour et al., 2009, Dangeti et al., 2024]. These fingerprints form recognizable patterns that generative models often learn and reproduce [Chen et al., 2025, Wan and Jing, 2024]. As these models become widely used in creative workflows, their outputs appear novel yet remain deeply connected to existing artistic traditions. This raises a central question for our work: how to evaluate stylistic influence within generative models? 

Creativity research suggests that innovation typically arises through exploration within structured conceptual spaces, involving recombination of prior ideas rather than complete novelty [Boden, 2004, Koestler, 1964]. Art theory aligns with this view, describing artworks as intertextual—embedded in networks of references and influences rather than isolated acts of originality [Barthes, 1977, Kristeva, 1980]. Cognitive psychology provides a mechanism for such intertextuality: motifs and stylistic cues activate schemas and prototypes, shaping perception and similarity judgments through category-based 

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.17500v1 [cs.LG] 17 May 2026 Café Terrace at Night
> by Vincent van Gogh (A1)
> The Scream
> by Edvard Munch (A2)
> Generated Image without
> explicit mention of A1 and A2

Figure 1: The Silent Brush : An image generated by a text-to-image model that, without explicitly prompting Café Terrace at Night or The Scream , visibly incorporates elements from both artworks. 

Prompt used for image generation: “A solitary, androgynous figure stands rigid in the foreground, clutching its head in a silent scream as golden café light spills onto the street behind. The glowing awning and receding tables stretch into the night, while the sky above churns in agitated waves of blue and yellow. Loose, directional brushstrokes bind figure, architecture, and sky into a single nocturnal field of anxiety, light, and distorted perception.” expectations [Rosch, 1975, Barsalou, 1985]. Aesthetic philosophy further notes that reproducibility, mechanical in Benjamin’s era and algorithmic today, alters notions of aura and authorship, raising ethical questions around originality and consent in generative systems [Benjamin, 1935]. Furthermore, recent machine learning studies indicate that generative models trained on large-scale image datasets can internalize stylistic patterns as statistical regularities, such as texture correlations and color distributions, within their learned representations [Everaert et al., 2023, Arias et al., 2025]. Analyses of diffusion models suggest that as model capacity and data scale increase, learned representations capture global covariance structures, which can support style-consistent generation under weak or ambiguous prompts [Li et al., 2024, Gu et al., 2023a]. Theoretical work modeling these systems as associative memories suggests that high-capacity models can form attractor states reflecting stylistic priors, which may appear during sampling and contribute to unintended stylistic persistence across motifs [Pham et al., 2025]. Empirical studies on zero-shot style transfer demonstrate that such priors can be activated without explicit conditioning, indicating that memorized stylistic features can generalize beyond their original context [Deng et al., 2024] (refer Section A.2 in the Appendix). Despite these converging insights, the dynamics of stylistic influence in generative models remain largely unexamined. Existing evaluations prioritize prompt fidelity or perceptual quality, leaving unanswered questions about how styles interact, compete, and hybridize within the latent spaces of these systems. Styles embedded in training data can exert asymmetric pull on outputs, shaping cultural hierarchies and creative possibilities. Recent evidence of memorization and leakage in large-scale models underscores the urgency of this inquiry, revealing that stylistic traces can be reactivated under targeted prompts [Shokri et al., 2017, Carlini et al., 2021]. Yet the field lacks a principled evaluation framework to measure influence, to distinguish diffuse inspiration from targeted recall, and to make these intertextual relations computationally legible for ethical governance. Related works are discussed in detail in Section A.2 in the Appendix. To better understand this gap, we view stylistic influence through the lens of the Silent Brush 

phenomenon, where learned styles reappear across generation contexts without explicit prompting (see Figure 1). As part of our contributions, we identify four guiding questions (refer Section 2) that systematically probe this phenomenon: ( Q1 ) do models imitate artworks?, ( Q2 ) how do models blend imitated artworks during generation?, whether ( Q3 ) do imitated artworks exhibit proactive blending?, and ( Q4 ) can we steer the strength of proactive blending?. We introduce Art Arena , an evaluation protocol that formalizes stylistic influence as a measurable construct. Art Arena consists of three stages. The first, Early Trials , tests whether a model can reproduce an artwork’s style when explicitly attributed, indicating the presence of stored stylistic 2traces. The second, Motif Duels , uses controlled prompts to examine how styles interact and whether hybridization occurs. The third, Influence Ledger , aggregates results into a ranked structure that 

identifies styles most likely to appear silently without explicit mention of their stylistic cues . These stages convert influence from an abstract notion into an empirical signal using structured comparisons. By making influence computationally observable, Art Arena provides a basis for evaluating stylistic leakage and understanding how training data shapes generative behavior. We evaluate Art Arena on widely used text-to-image diffusion models, including SD v1.5, SDXL, and SANA-1.5, covering both U-Net and DiT-based architectures. While designed for text-to-image models, the approach generalizes to other modalities. We make the following contributions: 

• We define the Silent Brush phenomenon as a lens for understanding how learned styles reappear across generation contexts without explicit attribution. 

• We formulate a set of guiding principles that systematically examine how models represent individual artworks, combine styles, exhibit relative stylistic influence, and enable the modulation of such influence during generation (refer Section 2). 

• We introduce Art Arena , an evaluation protocol that operationalizes these questions through structured stages, enabling empirical measurement of stylistic influence and leakage across generative models (refer Section 3). 

2 Evaluating the Silent Brush - Guiding Principles 

Q1: Do models imitate artworks? 

This dimension explores whether the model produces images that match both the content and style of a given artwork. A close match suggests that the model captures important details of the artwork rather than only general style patterns, consistent with prior observations that generative models can reproduce training instances with high fidelity [Somepalli et al., 2023, Carlini et al., 2021]. However, some parts of style, such as color or texture, may be captured better than others, reflecting the known challenges in separating and representing different stylistic components [Gatys et al., 2015, Portilla and Simoncelli, 2000]. Artworks that are represented more clearly are more likely to influence image generation even when they are not directly mentioned. This provides insight into how strongly individual artworks are encoded in the model and sets up the need to understand how multiple artworks interact. 

Q2: How do models blend imitated artworks during generation? 

Given that different artworks can be imitated with different strength, this dimension considers how they interact when combined. Prior work [Gatys et al., 2015, Portilla and Simoncelli, 2000] shows that content and style are not always cleanly separated, which can make combinations less stable. Because of this, features from one artwork may remain even when another artwork is specified. This raises the question of how stylistic elements are combined in the final output. The result may be a partial mix of artworks, incomplete blending, or visible traces of one artwork within another. This provides insight into how multiple artworks are jointly expressed and leads to the question of whether some artworks consistently have stronger influence than others. 

Q3: Do imitated artworks exhibit proactive blending? 

When some artworks appear more prominently in blended outputs, it becomes important to understand what drives this difference. Since generative models learn from many examples and represent them in distributed form, stylistic influence is best understood in comparison with other artworks [Ho et al., 2020, Rombach et al., 2022a, Gu et al., 2023a]. This dimension considers whether certain artworks assert their style more actively when combined with other stylistic counterparts. In such cases, one artwork may surface more visibly than another, indicating a stronger proactive blending tendency, which may be shaped by the model’s limited ability to cleanly separate content from style [Gatys et al., 2015, Portilla and Simoncelli, 2000]. Artworks that exhibit stronger proactive blending are more likely to reappear in future image generation, even when they are not explicitly specified. This provides insight into how stylistic dominance is distributed across artworks and leads to the question of whether this tendency can be modulated. 

3Q4: Can we steer the strength of proactive blending? 

> Given that artworks can differ in how strongly they assert their stylistic presence during blending, this dimension considers whether this tendency can be actively modulated. It focuses on whether artworks can become more prominent when the model better represents their stylistic characteristics. Prior work shows that generative outputs depend on how visual features are encoded and combined in latent representations [Ho et al., 2020, Rombach et al., 2022a, Gu et al., 2023a]. This examines whether targeted changes in the model’s representation alter the relative stylistic influence of artworks during blending, providing insight into how sensitive proactive blending is to the model’s internal representations.

3 Art Arena — A Protocol for Revealing Stylistic Influence 

Notations summary. Art Arena is a protocol that makes stylistic influence in text-to-image systems measurable through controlled interactions between artworks. We present the pseudocode of Art Arena in Algorithm 1 in the Appendix. The input Artworks is a list of records { title , artist ,

reference_image }. The text -to - image generator is Model 𝑀 . The comparator Proximity is any measure that compares generated images to a reference_image ; we denote its evaluation generically by prox (·, ·) . Global parameters are 𝐾 (samples per prompt), 𝑅 (rounds per duels), 

fitness_threshold (𝜏 𝑓 ) for entry, and margin_delta (𝛿 ) for round outcomes. The algorithm outputs 

FitSet (artworks passing the fitness test), Matches (pairwise results with scores), and Leaderboard 

(a ranked map of stylistic influence). Motifs for a challenger 𝑐 are obtained by ExtractMotifs (𝑐 ) as an ordered list of phrases; the defender template for artwork 𝑑 is the string: DefenderTemplate (𝑑 )= “⟨title (𝑑 )⟩ in the style of ⟨artist (𝑑 )⟩”. 

Step 1: Entry Trials (Fitness Test). This stage assesses whether 𝑀 can faithfully imitate an artwork’s distinctive style when attribution is explicit, indicating that the model is reactivating learned stylistic patterns rather than generating from diffuse influence. For each artwork 𝑤 ∈ Artworks :

Prompt (𝑤 ) = “⟨title (𝑤 )⟩ in the style of ⟨artist (𝑤 )⟩”.

Generate 𝐾 sample Images = {𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥 𝐾 } via 𝑀 (Prompt (𝑤 )). Compute      

> Fit (𝑤 )=1
> 𝐾
> 𝐾 ∑︁
> 𝑘 =1
> prox  𝑥 𝑘 ,reference_image (𝑤 )(1)

If Fit (𝑤 ) ≥ 𝜏 𝑓 , the artwork is added to FitSet . A high proximity score under explicit prompting indicates that the model is likely recalling stored stylistic traces rather than generating from diffuse influence, a behavior consistent with memory and priming effects [Tulving, 1985, Stevens et al., 2008] and supported by evidence of memorization and leakage in generative models [Shokri et al., 2017, Carlini et al., 2021]. When a model imitates with high accuracy, it signals that the style is strongly encoded in its parameters, increasing the likelihood of unintentional appearance in other generated images. The artworks comprising the FitSet are presented in Tables 4, 5, and 6 in the Appendix. This establishes which styles are strongly encoded in the model’s parameters, directly addressing whether 

𝑀 faithfully imitates artworks under explicit attribution. 

Step 2: Motif Duels (Battleground). In this stage, artworks admitted to FitSet compete in a round-robin interactions, where each artwork faces every other as challenger and defender. The defender’s identity is anchored by its title and artist, while the challenger contributes motifs drawn from its own stylistic vocabulary. For each match, we sample combinations of motifs from the challenger and blend them with the defender’s template to compose prompts (see Figure 3). Across 𝑅 

rounds, the model generates 𝐾 images per prompt, and proximity scores are computed against both reference artworks:             

> prox 𝑐 (𝑟 )=1
> 𝐾
> 𝐾 ∑︁
> 𝑘 =1
> prox  𝑥 𝑟 ,𝑘 ,ref (𝑐 ),prox 𝑑 (𝑟 )=1
> 𝐾
> 𝐾 ∑︁
> 𝑘 =1
> prox  𝑥 𝑟 ,𝑘 ,ref (𝑑 )(2)

A round is awarded to the challenger if prox 𝑐 (𝑟 ) − prox 𝑑 (𝑟 ) > 𝛿 and round is awarded to the defender if prox 𝑑 (𝑟 ) − prox 𝑐 (𝑟 ) > 𝛿 . The artwork that secures the majority of rounds claims the match, and its Score is incremented in the Leaderboard . Unlike the prior methods reviewed in Section A.2 in the Appendix, the proposed round - robin setup captures pairwise artwork interactions when 4Semantics Aesthetics Fidelity 

> 0.2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 1.2
> 1.4
> Imitation Score
> Median
> Mean

(a) SD v1.5 Semantics Aesthetics Fidelity  

> 0.2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 1.2
> 1.4
> Imitation Score
> Median
> Mean

(b) SDXL Semantics Aesthetics Fidelity  

> 0.2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 1.2
> 1.4
> Imitation Score
> Median
> Mean

(c) SANA-1.5 

Figure 2: We present the distribution of fitness scores for SD v1.5, SDXL, and SANA - 1.5 across three proximity metrics, evaluated on 8,737 artworks from twenty popular artists. For the Semantics and Fidelity metrics, a higher mean indicates better performance, whereas for Aesthetics, a lower mean indicates better performance. A tighter interquartile range reflects more concentrated scores, while a wider range indicates greater variability. Outliers correspond to artworks whose scores deviate substantially from the overall distribution, suggesting that the models strongly or weakly recall a small subset of artworks with extreme confidence levels. Defender  2                

> Challenger
> Defender 2
> Challenger Defender 1
> Vivid colors such as blue,
> yellow, and orange create
> contrasts across the sections
> of a figure positioned against
> a flat, sparse background in
> the style of The Church at
> Auvers by Vincent van Gogh .
> Proximity (Semantics )Proximity (Fidelity )
> Defender 1
> Vivid colors such as blue, yellow,
> and orange create contrasts across
> the sections of a figure
> positioned against a flat, sparse
> background in the style of
> Waterloo Bridge, London by Claude
> Monet.
> Challenger
> Challenger
> Proximity (Fidelity )

Figure 3: Motif Duel for SD v1.5 evaluated under the fidelity based proximity (CSD). The challenger contributes the motif which is paired with defender 1 and defender 2 to form two composite prompts. The generated images are then evaluated for proximity to both the challenger and the corresponding defender. The figure shows that the motif composed with different defenders yields stylistically distinct outputs as reflected in the proximity scores. assessing stylistic influence. For illustrative examples of extracted motifs and the corresponding motif-combination prompts, see Section A.4 in the Appendix. 

Step 3: Influence Ledger. After all pairwise matches are complete, the results are aggregated into a Leaderboard by ranking artworks according to their cumulative Score , computed as the number of matches won across all roles in the round-robin interactions. This ranking serves not only as a summary of outcomes but as a structural map of influence within the model, identifying which styles exert dominant pull. This produces a structural map of proactive stylistic dominance, identifying which styles consistently exert stronger influence across all pairwise interactions. 

If the challenger consistently outperforms the defender in Motif Duels, the defender’s stylistic representation is likely shallow in the model’s parameter space, making unintentional style leakage under generalized prompts less likely. In such cases, the challenger acts as a “silent brush,” dominating without explicit stylistic cues such as artwork or artist names. Conversely, if the defender dominates, its stylistic signature is likely deeply embedded and broadly distributed across the parameter space. These styles exhibit high accommodation ,blending easily with other motifs and persisting under hybridization, making them more likely to appear unintentionally as a “silent brush” in generated images. 

54 Experiments 

Dataset and generative models : We select the top twenty most popular artists from WikiArt [wik, 2026] (BSD-3 license) and collect all associated artworks, totaling 8,737 images. This choice ensures that we consider artworks likely present in large-scale web corpora such as LAION [Schuhmann et al., 2022], commonly used to train text-to-image models. We evaluate three widely adopted text-to-image generation models: two U-Net-based diffusion models, stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0 (SDXL; CreativeML Open RAIL+M License) [AI, 2023] and Stable Diffusion v1.5 (SD v1.5; CreativeML Open RAIL-M License) [Rombach et al., 2022b], and one DiT-based diffusion model, SANA-1.5 (Apache 2.0 License) [Xie et al., 2025]. 

Proximity metrics : We measure proximity with three complementary metrics: CLIP cosine similarity [Radford et al., 2021, Hessel et al., 2021], Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) [Zhang et al., 2018], and Contrastive Style Descriptors (CSD) [Somepalli et al., 2024]. CLIP captures high-level semantics and composition, LPIPS measures perceptual closeness in structure and texture, and CSD encodes stylistic fidelity (e.g., color, texture, stroke patterns). Each metric reflects a distinct aspect of style and has known limitations, including sensitivity to prompt wording and biases (CLIP), vulnerability under distribution shift (LPIPS), and dependence on curated training data (CSD); together, they provide a balanced assessment of stylistic similarity. Refer Appendix (Section A.5) for a detailed discussion of metric properties, limitations, and dataset considerations. 

Motif extraction and blending : We construct challenger template via a two-stage pipeline. First, we perform motif extraction by analyzing each artwork to identify content elements (objects, structures, and spatial components). This is done by retrieving commonly referenced names and descriptions from art-historical sources (e.g., museum and curatorial references), ensuring the motif reflects established descriptive conventions. Second, we generate challenger template by blending motifs at varying levels. For an artwork with 𝑅 

motifs, we enumerate all non-empty motif combinations and convert each combination into a coherent, style-neutral scene description. From this pool, we sample 𝑘 challenger template. We keep this 

𝑘 -sized set fixed per artwork for the entire tournament to ensure consistent and comparable matchups across rounds. We present an example of motifs description that were extracted and prompts after blending them in Table 3 and 7 in the Appendix. Prompt templates for motif extraction and motif blending, along with the source list used for motif descriptions, are provided in the Appendix (refer Figures 4, 5 and 6). All stages of this pipeline are executed using GPT-4o. Additional details are provided in the Appendix (refer Section A.3). 

Style learning : After the tournament, we perform stylistic fine-tuning of SD v1.5, SDXL, and SANA-1.5 using Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) on the bottom five artworks for each model, and then conduct another tournament under the same conditions. This tests whether repeated exposure strengthens the model’s internal representation of these styles and increases their chances of winning duels, i.e., whether prior losers can rise in ranking by defeating previously dominant artworks. 

Experimental setup : We follow Algorithm 1 (Appendix) and run it three times, once per proximity metric: CLIP, LPIPS, and CSD. For Early Trials, prompts of the form “<title(w)> in the style of <artist(w)>” generate 𝐾 = 1 image per artwork using SD v1.5, Stable Diffusion XL, and SANA-1.5. Due to computational complexity and noise from weak imitations, we set the fitness threshold 𝜏 𝑓 to select the top twenty artworks by each metric. This choice balances coverage and tractability, ensuring a sufficiently diverse set of artworks to capture meaningful interactions in Motif Duels while keeping the number of pairwise comparisons computationally feasible. The selected artworks form the FitSet . Motif duels are then run in a round robin fashion on FitSet with 𝑅 = 5

rounds per pair, blending challenger motifs with defender templates and computing proximity using the same metric. The threshold ( 𝛿 ) is set to 0, so the winner is the artwork with the higher score. Finally, outcomes are aggregated into Influence Ledgers. 

Implementation details and computational resources : All fine-tuning experiments are conducted using Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) with rank 𝑟 = 64 , applied to the denoising backbone at a resolution of 1024 × 1024 for 10 epochs with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −4. All runs are performed on a single NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU (32 GB). The resulting fine-tuned LoRA checkpoints are lightweight, requiring only 3.1 MB for Stable Diffusion v1.5, 22.3 MB for SDXL, and 8.2 MB for SANA-1.5, enabling efficient storage and deployment without modifying the base model weights. 6Table 1: Influence Ledgers from Motif Duels for SD v1.5 . Each table presents results in the order 

Semantic , Aesthetics , and Fidelity (top to bottom). Ranks are assigned by total wins, with challenger wins used as a tie-breaker. The tables on the right show rankings after fine-tuning, where ▲+x denotes improvements and ▼-x denotes declines in rank. Lower ranks indicate greater leakage potential. In the pre-trained setting (tables on the left), we display the top-3 and bottom-5 artworks, and we report their updated ranks following stylistic fine-tuning in the corresponding tables on the right.                                        

> Rank Artwork (Pre-trained) Wins as Challenger Wins as Defender
> 1Leonardo da Vinci, Madonna Litta (Madonna and the Child) 16 13 2Vincent van Gogh, Wheat Fields at Auvers Under Clouded Sky 13 15 3Claude Monet, Pool with Waterlilies 13 15 16 Claude Monet, Yachts at Argenteuil 4717 Claude Monet, Small Branch of the Seine 4618 Jackson Pollock, Number 3 110 19 Jackson Pollock, Number 48 1820 Raphael, The Fall on the Road to Calvary 09
> Rank Artwork (Post stylistic fine-tuning)
> 1Claude Monet, Pool with Waterlilies

▲+3    

> 2Leonardo da Vinci, Madonna Litta (Madonna and the Child)

▼-1    

> 4Vincent van Gogh, Wheat Fields at Auvers Under Clouded Sky

▼-2    

> 16 Jackson Pollock, Number 3

▲+2    

> 17 Jackson Pollock, Number 48

▲+2    

> 18 Claude Monet, Yachts at Argenteuil

▼-2    

> 19 Claude Monet, Small Branch of the Seine

▼-2   

> 20 Raphael, The Fall on the Road to Calvary

Rank Artwork (Pre-trained) Wins as Challenger Wins as Defender 

1 Jackson Pollock, Circumcision January 17 15 2 Jackson Pollock, Number 17 17 15 3 Andy Warhol, Spam 19 12 16 Jackson Pollock, Enchanted Forest 8 317 Claude Monet, Houses of Parliament, Fog Effect 8 218 Claude Monet, Lavacourt, Sun and Snow 7 519 Jackson Pollock, Number 4 6 420 Andy Warhol, Rorschach 2 0

Rank Artwork (Post stylistic fine-tuning) 

1 Andy Warhol, Spam ▲+2 

2 Jackson Pollock, Circumcision January ▼-1 

3 Jackson Pollock, Number 17 ▼-1 

11 Jackson Pollock, Enchanted Forest ▲+5 

16 Jackson Pollock, Number 4 ▲+3 

17 Andy Warhol, Rorschach ▲+3 

19 Claude Monet, Lavacourt, Sun and Snow 

20 Claude Monet, Houses of Parliament, Fog Effect ▼-2                                        

> Rank Artwork (Pre-trained) Wins as Challenger Wins as Defender
> 1Vincent van Gogh, Olive Grove 19 12 2Vincent van Gogh, A Group of Cottages 14 12 3Vincent van Gogh, Wheat Field at Auvers with White House 14 12 16 Vincent van Gogh, Daubigny’s Garden 7817 Claude Monet, Waterloo Bridge, London 312 18 Pablo Picasso, Weeping Woman 013 19 Claude Monet, The Sea Seen from the Cliffs of Fecamp 012 20 Vincent van Gogh, Flowering Garden 07
> Rank Artwork (Post stylistic fine-tuning)
> 1Pablo Picasso, Weeping Woman

▲+17    

> 3Vincent van Gogh, Olive Grove

▼-2    

> 6Vincent van Gogh, Wheat Field at Auvers with White House

▼-3    

> 8Vincent van Gogh, Daubigny’s Garden

▲+9    

> 9Vincent van Gogh, A Group of Cottages

▼-7    

> 15 Vincent van Gogh, Flowering Garden

▲+5    

> 16 Claude Monet, The Sea Seen from the Cliffs of Fecamp

▲+3    

> 17 Claude Monet, Waterloo Bridge, London

▼-1 

Imitation–Motif Duel consistency : We jointly analyze outcomes from imitation measured in Early Trials and from Motif Duels for artworks in the FitSet to see if they point to the same winner. Here, consistency means the winner under imitation matches the winner in the corresponding Motif Duel for the same challenger–defender pair. We then summarize these matches in the matrix over the FitSet, with rows treating artworks as the challenger and columns as the defender. The artworks are arranged as per their imitation rank with A1 being the highest ranked artwork. Each cell records agreement or disagreement between the two outcomes. We count two symmetric types of agreement: Challenger agreement when the row artwork wins in both imitation and Motif Duel, and Defender agreement 

when the column artwork wins in both imitation and Motif Duel. We also count Disagreement when neither row artwork nor column artwork wins in both imitation and Motif Duel. These counts indicate where imitation strength aligns with duel performance across the matrix. 

5 Results and Analysis 

In this section, we analyze and answer the questions raised in Section 2. 

Do models imitate artworks? Entry Trials show minimal overlap among artworks across FitSet 

memberships: no single artwork qualifies consistently under all three proximity metrics (Tables 4, 5, 6), indicating that no artwork is uniformly well-represented across stylistic dimensions. This is consistent with prior work showing that generative models encode style through distributed representations with varying fidelity Gatys et al. [2015], Somepalli et al. [2023]. Fitness score distributions (Figure 2; Figure 7 in the Appendix) reveal substantial variability across artworks, with prominent outliers on both ends; a small subset of artworks is imitated with notably high confidence, while many yield low similarity. This confirms that imitation is artwork dependent rather than uniform. Across models, imitation behavior is distinct and multifaceted (Figure 2; Figure 7 in the Appendix). 

SD v1.5 achieves the strongest imitation scores, leading across Semantics, Aesthetics, and Fidelity, suggesting that its representations capture stylistic attributes more consistently across dimensions despite being the smallest model. SDXL , also based on a U-Net architecture, remains competitive with SD v1.5 on Semantics but falls noticeably behind on Aesthetics and Fidelity, indicating that scaling the U-Net architecture does not uniformly translate to improved stylistic recall. SANA-1.5 ,7built on a DiT backbone, performs consistently weaker across all three metrics with higher variability, suggesting that its representations may capture stylistic attributes less consistently across artworks. Models imitate artworks unevenly across both stylistic dimensions and architectures. SD v1.5 (U-Net) achieves the strongest and most consistent imitation across Semantics, Aesthetics, and Fidelity. SDXL (U-Net) imitates comparably on Semantics but less reliably on Aesthetics and Fidelity, while SANA-1.5 (DiT) shows the weakest and most variable imitation across all three proximity dimensions. 

How do models blend artworks during generation? Figures 16, 17, and 18 in the Appendix illustrate how outputs evolve when challenger and defender signals are combined. The signals from the defenders and challengers are not treated symmetrically and vary basis artwork interaction. As shown in Figure 16, generated outputs (c) and (d), which share the same challenger but differ in defender templates, retain different aspects of the challenger, with one preserving texture cues and the other emphasizing color composition. Figure 3 further shows that changing only the defender, while keeping the rest of the prompt fixed, is sufficient to alter the stylistic character of the output, suggesting that the model resolves competing stylistic cues rather than averaging them (refer to Figures 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 13 and 14 in the Appendix). In Figure 13 (Defender 2), the prompt specifies Alpilles with Olive Trees in the Foreground by Vincent van Gogh, yet the output exhibits visual elements associated with 

The Starry Night by Vincent van Gogh, indicating within-artist leakage toward more strongly encoded works. These patterns reflect differences in how models encode stylistic attributes. In SDXL , Vincent van Gogh ranks highly in Semantics and Fidelity, while Georgia O’Keeffe leads in Aesthetics (Table 8), suggesting dimension-specific preferences. SANA-1.5 shows a different pattern, with Andy Warhol leading Semantics and Jackson Pollock dominating Aesthetics and Fidelity (Table 9). In contrast, SD v1.5 exhibits more balanced behavior, with different artists leading across metrics (Table 1). These trends indicate that stylistic influence during blending depends on how strongly different attributes are represented within each model. Blending selectively retains different stylistic attributes, with outputs often influenced by dominant or strongly encoded artworks even when not explicitly specified. Across models, SDXL exhibits concentrated, dimension-specific dominance, with certain artists consistently leading specific metrics. SANA-1.5 shows clustered dominance around a small set of visually distinctive styles, while SD v1.5 distributes influence more evenly with different artists leading across metrics. These differences indicate that blending behavior is governed by how strongly stylistic attributes are encoded within each model. 

Do imitated artworks exhibit proactive blending? Highly imitated artworks exhibit proactive blending during Motif Duels, either as challengers or defenders, with the dominant role depending on both the model and the stylistic dimension. SD v1.5 shows challenger-dominant behavior under Aesthetics and Fidelity (Table 1), indicating that stylistic traces in these dimensions are strongly encoded and can assert themselves without explicit invocation; however, sensitivity analysis (Figures 19(b,c)) shows that defender wins are distributed across more artworks, while challenger wins remain concentrated among fewer. Under Semantics, both roles decline at comparable rates (Figure 19(a)), indicating more balanced competition. In contrast, SDXL exhibits the opposite pattern: defender wins dominate under Aesthetics and Fidelity (Table 8), suggesting that these attributes are more broadly embedded and expressed through explicit invocation, whereas challenger wins dominate under Semantics, where styles transfer more readily through motif contributions; sensitivity analysis supports this trend (Figures 20(a–c)). SANA-1.5 extends this behavior further, showing challenger-dominant patterns across all stylistic dimensions (Table 9), indicating that motif-based transfer operates broadly; under Fidelity, defender wins remain widely distributed (Figure 21(c)), but under Aesthetics, defender wins decline more sharply than challenger wins (Figure 21(b)), making it the only case where challenger influence spans more artworks than defender influence. Taken together, these model-specific behaviors reveal a recurring pattern in how influence is distributed across roles. Defender wins generally span more artworks than challenger wins, indicating that defender influence is more broadly distributed, while challenger influence is concentrated among fewer artworks. However, imitation rank only partially predicts blending dominance. Higher-ranked 8artworks consistently dominate as defenders (Tables 10–17), but this relationship does not hold for challengers. For example, in Table 10, artwork A18 records two challenger wins despite ranking below A5, A10, and A13, which achieve none. Similar irregularities appear across models and metrics, indicating that imitation rank captures how reproducibly a style is encoded, but does not capture how styles interact during generation. Imitated artworks exhibit proactive blending that depends on the model and stylistic dimension. In SD v1.5, challenger wins dominate under Aesthetics and Fidelity; in SDXL, challenger wins dominate under Semantics but defender wins dominate under Aesthetics and Fidelity; in SANA-1.5, challenger wins dominate across all dimensions, with the widest spread under Aesthetics. Across models, defender wins span more artworks than challenger wins, except in SANA-1.5 under Aesthetics. Imitation rank predicts defender dominance but not challenger performance, indicating the need for interaction-based evaluation. 

Can we steer the strength of proactive blending? We observe that targeted stylistic fine-tuning often leads to shifts in the Influence Ledgers, with targeted artworks improving in rank across models (refer Table 1; Table 8 and 9 in the Appendix). This suggests that modifying an artwork’s representation can increase its influence during blending. However, the frequency and magnitude of these shifts vary across models. SANA-1.5 (refer Table 9 in the Appendix) exhibits more frequent and larger rank changes, while SDXL (refer Table 8 in the Appendix) shows moderate adjustments and 

SD v1.5 (refer Table 1) remains comparatively stable. These differences suggest that models differ in how readily their internal representations adapt during fine-tuning, potentially reflecting variation in how stylistic abstractions are encoded. At the same time, artworks that rank highly before fine-tuning tend to show limited displacement afterward, with only minor changes in their positions. This indicates that strongly represented artworks remain relatively stable, suggesting that their influence is deeply embedded in the model’s representation and less affected by targeted updates. Proactive blending can be steered through fine-tuning, but only to a limited extent. Fine-tuning introduces shifts in stylistic influence, with the extent of these shifts varying across models. Models such as SANA-1.5 show higher sensitivity to fine-tuning, while SDXL and SD v1.5 are more stable. However, artworks that are strongly represented remain resistant to displacement, indicating that the strength of proactive blending is only partially controllable and depends on how representations are encoded within each model. Table 2: Imitation–Motif Duel consistency for SD v1.5 under Stylistic fidelity-based proximity .Rows index FitSet artworks (refer Table 4) as challengers and columns index FitSet artworks as defenders. Each cell records whether the winner under imitation matches the winner under motif-duel for that pair: ✓ if the challenger wins in both, ✓ if the defender wins in both, and ✗ if the outcomes disagree. Row, column, and total agreement counts are also reported for reference.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

> Matrix Challenger Win Count
> A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 A6 A7 A8 A9 A10 A11 A12 A13 A14 A15 A16 A17 A18 A19 A20 Challenger Defender
> Defender
> A1 -✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✓✓✗✓✓✓17 0A2 ✗-✓✓✓✓✓✓✗✗✓✓✗✗✓✗✗✓✓✓12 0A3 ✓✓-✓✗✗✗✓✗✗✓✓✗✗✓✗✗✓✓✓82A4 ✗✓✓-✗✗✗✓✗✗✓✓✗✓✗✗✗✓✓✓72A5 ✓✓✓✗-✗✗✓✗✗✓✓✗✗✗✗✗✓✓✓63A6 ✓✓✓✓✓-✗✗✗✗✗✗✓✗✗✗✓✗✗✗25A7 ✓✓✗✗✓✓-✓✗✗✓✓✓✗✓✗✗✓✓✓84A8 ✓✗✓✓✓✓✓-✗✗✓✗✗✗✗✗✗✓✓✓46A9 ✓✓✓✓✓✗✓✓-✗✗✗✓✓✗✗✓✗✗✗37A10 ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓-✗✗✗✗✗✗✗✗✗✗09A11 ✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✗✓✓-✓✗✗✗✗✗✗✗✓28A12 ✓✗✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✗-✗✗✗✗✗✓✓✓39A13 ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓-✗✗✗✗✗✗✗012 A14 ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓-✗✗✗✗✗✗013 A15 ✓✗✗✓✗✓✗✗✓✓✗✗✓✓-✗✗✗✓✓27A16 ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓-✗✗✗✗015 A17 ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓-✗✗✗016 A18 ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✗✓✓✓-✓✓216 A19 ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✗✗✓✓✓✓✓✗-✓115 A20 ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓-019
> Win Count Challenger 01232226107743412810 12 245 Defender 17 15 14 14 14 13 12 10 11 10 6675543110

96 Conclusion 

We presented a framework for studying stylistic influence in generative models as a measurable, interaction-driven phenomenon rather than a static similarity problem. Through controlled compe-titions between artworks, our results show that artistic traits can persist, compete, and re-emerge under semantic interference in ways that are neither uniform nor binary. By operationalizing these interactions through Art Arena, we move toward a new class of evaluations that study not only what generative models create but also how cultural and artistic influences propagate within them. As generative systems become increasingly entangled with human creativity, we believe such evaluations will be essential for building more transparent, accountable, and culturally aware generative AI systems. 

References 

Sina Jafarpour, Güngör Polatkan, Eugene Brevdo, Shannon Hughes, Andrei Brasoveanu, and Ingrid Daubechies. Stylistic analysis of paintings usingwavelets and machine learning. In 2009 17th european signal processing conference , pages 1220–1224. IEEE, 2009. Abhishek Dangeti, Pavan Gajula, Vivek Srivastava, and Vikram Jamwal. Style-based clustering of visual artworks and the play of neural style-representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.08245 ,2024. Lingxiao Chen, Liqin Wang, and Wei Lu. Stylesentinel: Reliable artistic copyright verification via stylistic fingerprints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.01335 , 2025. Mengzhen Wan and Nie Jing. Style recommendation and simulation for handmade artworks using generative adversarial networks. Scientific Reports , 14(1):28002, 2024. Margaret A Boden. The creative mind: Myths and mechanisms . Routledge, 2004. Arthur Koestler. The act of creation. 1964. Roland Barthes. Image-music-text. Hill and Wang , 146, 1977. Julia Kristeva. Word, dialogue, and novel. desire in language: A semiotic approach to literature and art. T. Gora et al , 1980. Eleanor Rosch. Cognitive representations of semantic categories. Journal of experimental psychology: General , 104(3):192, 1975. Lawrence W Barsalou. Ideals, central tendency, and frequency of instantiation as determinants of graded structure in categories. Journal of experimental psychology: learning, memory, and cognition , 11(4):629, 1985. Walter Benjamin. The work of art in the age of mechanical reproduction, 1936. New York , 1935. Martin Nicolas Everaert, Marco Bocchio, Sami Arpa, Sabine Süsstrunk, and Radhakrishna Achanta. Diffusion in style. In Proceedings of the ieee/cvf international conference on computer vision ,pages 2251–2261, 2023. Guillem Arias, Ariadna Solà, Martí Armengod, and Maria Vanrell. Color encoding in latent space of stable diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.09477 , 2025. Xiang Li, Yixiang Dai, and Qing Qu. Understanding generalizability of diffusion models requires rethinking the hidden gaussian structure. Advances in neural information processing systems , 37: 57499–57538, 2024. Xiangming Gu, Chao Du, Tianyu Pang, Chongxuan Li, Min Lin, and Ye Wang. On memorization in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02664 , 2023a. Bao Pham, Gabriel Raya, Matteo Negri, Mohammed J Zaki, Luca Ambrogioni, and Dmitry Krotov. Memorization to generalization: Emergence of diffusion models from associative memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21777 , 2025. 10 Yingying Deng, Xiangyu He, Fan Tang, and Weiming Dong. Z*: Zero-shot style transfer via attention reweighting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 6934–6944, 2024. Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference attacks against machine learning models. In 2017 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP) , pages 3–18. IEEE, 2017. Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al. Extracting training data from large language models. In 30th USENIX security symposium (USENIX Security 21) , pages 2633–2650, 2021. Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Diffusion art or digital forgery? investigating data replication in diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 6048–6058, 2023. Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. A neural algorithm of artistic style. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.06576 , 2015. Javier Portilla and Eero P Simoncelli. A parametric texture model based on joint statistics of complex wavelet coefficients. International journal of computer vision , 40(1):49–70, 2000. Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020. Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 10684–10695, 2022a. Endel Tulving. How many memory systems are there? American psychologist , 40(4):385, 1985. WD Stevens, GS Wig, and DL Schacter. Implicit memory and priming. CONCISE LEARNING AND MEMORY: THE EDITOR’S SELECTION , 65, 2008. Popular artists. https://www.wikiart.org/en/popular-artists , 2026. Accessed January 2026. Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:25278–25294, 2022. Stability AI. Stable diffusion xl base 1.0 model card. https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/ stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0 , 2023. Accessed January 2026. Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 10684–10695, 2022b. Enze Xie, Junsong Chen, Yuyang Zhao, Jincheng Yu, Ligeng Zhu, Chengyue Wu, Yujun Lin, Zhekai Zhang, Muyang Li, Junyu Chen, et al. Sana 1.5: Efficient scaling of training-time and inference-time compute in linear diffusion transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.18427 , 2025. Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8748–8763. PmLR, 2021. Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning. In Proceedings of the 2021 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pages 7514–7528, 2021. 11 Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 586–595, 2018. Gowthami Somepalli, Anubhav Gupta, Kamal Gupta, Shramay Palta, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, Abhinav Shrivastava, and Tom Goldstein. Measuring style similarity in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01292 , 2024. Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding deep learning requires rethinking generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017. Vitaly Feldman. Does learning require memorization? a short tale about a long tail. In Proceedings of the 52nd annual ACM SIGACT symposium on theory of computing , pages 954–959, 2020. Xiangming Gu, Chao Du, Tianyu Pang, Chongxuan Li, Min Lin, and Ye Wang. On memorization in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02664 , 2023b. Shawn Shan, Jenna Cryan, Emily Wenger, Haitao Zheng, Rana Hanocka, and Ben Y Zhao. Glaze: Protecting artists from style mimicry by {Text-to-Image } models. In 32nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23) , pages 2187–2204, 2023. Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:36479–36494, 2022a. Jamie Hayes, Luca Melis, George Danezis, and Emiliano De Cristofaro. Logan: Membership inference attacks against generative models. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies ,2019. Yan Pang and Tianhao Wang. Black-box membership inference attacks against fine-tuned diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.08207 , 2023. Yan Pang, Tianhao Wang, Xuhui Kang, Mengdi Huai, and Yang Zhang. White-box membership inference attacks against diffusion models. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies , 2025. Sarah Andersen, Kelly McKernan, and Karla Ortiz. Class action complaint: Andersen et al. v. stability ai ltd. et al. https://ipwatchdog.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/Andersen_et_al_ v._Stability_AI.pdf , 2023. United States District Court, Northern District of California, Case No. 3:23-cv-00201. Matthew Lindberg. Applying current copyright law to artificial intelligence image generators in the context of anderson v. stability ai, ltd. Cybaris Intell. Prop. L. Rev. , 15:37, 2024. High Court of Justice of England and Wales. Getty images (us) inc and others v. stability ai limited: Approved high court judgment. https://www.judiciary.uk/wp-content/uploads/2025/ 11/Getty-Images-v-Stability-AI.pdf , 2025. Neutral Citation: [2025] EWHC 2863 (Ch), Business and Property Courts of England and Wales, Intellectual Property List (ChD). Matthew Coulter. Aiming for fairness: an exploration into getty images v. stability ai and its importance in the landscape of modern copyright law. DePaul J. Art Tech. & Intell. Prop. L , 34: 124, 2024. Stability AI. Stable diffusion xl model card, 2023. https://stability.ai. Nicolas Carlini, Jamie Hayes, Milad Nasr, Matthew Jagielski, Vikash Sehwag, Florian Tramer, Borja Balle, Daphne Ippolito, and Eric Wallace. Extracting training data from diffusion models. In 32nd USENIX security symposium (USENIX Security 23) , pages 5253–5270, 2023. Lei Jiang. Research on copyright infringement issues of generative artificial intelligence. Law and Humanities , 1(1):51–60, 2025. K Wiggers. Image-generating ai can copy and paste from training data, raising ip concerns. techcrunch (2022), 2024. 12 David Thiel. Identifying and eliminating csam in generative ml training data and mod-els. https://stacks.stanford.edu/file/druid:kh752sm9123/ml_training_data_ csam_report-2023-12-23.pdf , December 2023. Report published by the Stanford Internet Observatory. Samantha Cole. Largest dataset powering ai images removed after dis-covery of child sexual abuse material. https://www.404media.co/ laion-datasets-removed-stanford-csam-child-abuse/ , December 2023. Report on the removal of LAION datasets following Stanford CSAM findings. LAION e.V. Releasing re-laion-5b: Transparent iteration on laion-5b with additional safety fixes. 

https://laion.ai/blog/relaion-5b/ , August 2024. Official LAION announcement of the Re-LAION-5B dataset revision. Ninad Joshi, Vivek Srivastava, and Shirish Karande. Dota: Latent distribution conditioned data attribution for diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 2022–2031, 2026. Jie-Jing Shao, Jiang-Xin Shi, Xiao-Wen Yang, Lan-Zhe Guo, and Yu-Feng Li. Investigating the limitation of clip models: The worst-performing categories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03324 ,2023. Jonathan Ho, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, David J Fleet, Mohammad Norouzi, and Tim Salimans. Cascaded diffusion models for high fidelity image generation. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 23(47):1–33, 2022. Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:36479–36494, 2022b. Markus Kettunen, Erik Härkönen, and Jaakko Lehtinen. E-lpips: robust perceptual image similarity via random transformation ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.03973 , 2019. Sara Ghazanfari, Siddharth Garg, Prashanth Krishnamurthy, Farshad Khorrami, and Alexandre Araujo. R-lpips: An adversarially robust perceptual similarity metric. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15157 ,2023. Peng Xing, Haofan Wang, Yanpeng Sun, Qixun Wang, Xu Bai, Hao Ai, Renyuan Huang, and Zechao Li. Csgo: Content-style composition in text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.16766 ,2024. Chong Mou, Yanze Wu, Wenxu Wu, Zinan Guo, Pengze Zhang, Yufeng Cheng, Yiming Luo, Fei Ding, Shiwen Zhang, Xinghui Li, et al. Dreamo: A unified framework for image customization. In 

Proceedings of the SIGGRAPH Asia 2025 Conference Papers , pages 1–12, 2025. 13 Appendix 

Appendix Contents 

A.1 Ethical Considerations and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 A.2 Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 A.3 Motif Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 A.4 Artworks and their extracted motifs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 A.5 Proximity metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 

A.1 Ethical Considerations and Limitations 

Our work aims to make stylistic influence in generative models measurable, but studying this phenomenon introduces important ethical and methodological challenges. Artistic style is historically and culturally situated, and any computational representation necessarily simplifies complex artistic practices into measurable signals. Consequently, the influence scores produced by Art Arena should not be interpreted as objective measures of originality, artistic value, or ownership. Art Arena relies on proxy similarity metrics such as CLIP similarity, LPIPS, and CSD, each of which captures only partial aspects of style. CLIP-based measures may conflate semantics with style, LPIPS can be sensitive to structural perturbations, and CSD inherits biases from its training data. Although we use multiple complementary metrics, the resulting measurements remain approximations of stylistic influence rather than direct evidence of memorization or copyright infringement. The motif extraction pipeline also introduces limitations. Motifs are derived using GPT-4o and external art-historical descriptions, which may reflect curatorial bias, omissions, or uneven documentation. Converting motifs into prompts further introduces prompt-design effects that may influence generations independently of the model’s latent representations. Our experiments focus on highly popular WikiArt artists, motivated by their likely presence in large-scale web datasets. While practical, this limits coverage of underrepresented artistic traditions, regions, and mediums. In addition, Art Arena studies stylistic influence primarily through pairwise interactions, whereas real-world generations may involve many interacting stylistic sources simultaneously. The framework measures relative stylistic dominance but does not establish causal attribution at the parameter or dataset level. Higher leaderboard rankings indicate stronger reappearance under our protocol, but do not reveal whether this behavior arises from memorization, distributed generalization, dataset frequency, or architectural biases. Similarly, because several contemporary models do not disclose training data, we cannot directly verify the presence of specific artworks in their training corpora. Beyond technical limitations, there are broader ethical concerns regarding how such evaluations may be interpreted or used. Influence scores could be misused to rank styles competitively, justify appropriation, or reinforce cultural hierarchies already present in web-scale datasets. Moreover, analysis of stylistic persistence may indirectly expose properties of underlying training datasets. To mitigate these risks, Art Arena is intended as a diagnostic framework for transparency, auditing, and governance rather than enforcement or adjudication. Its goal is to support informed discussion around attribution, consent, dataset curation, and cultural equity while avoiding prescriptive judgments about artistic legitimacy or ownership. Finally, our work does not make legal claims regarding copyright infringement, fair use, or authorship. Art Arena identifies measurable patterns of stylistic persistence and interaction, but translating these observations into legal or normative conclusions depends on broader cultural, regulatory, and jurisdiction-specific considerations outside the scope of this paper. 

A.2 Related Work Imitation and Memorization A first line of work evaluates whether diffusion models can reproduce training images with high fidelity. Retrieval-based audits generate multiple samples per prompt and identify memorized instances through pixel-level or embedding-based similarity [Somepalli et al., 14 2023, Carlini et al., 2021]. Complementary analyses connect memorization to optimization regimes, overparameterization, and data duplication in generative models [Zhang et al., 2017, Feldman, 2020, Gu et al., 2023b]. Together, these approaches establish that diffusion models can memorize and reproduce training content at the instance level. However, these evaluations rely on a one-to-one retrieval paradigm, where each generated image is matched to a single reference. While effective for detecting near-duplicate reproduction, this setup cannot capture how multiple training samples jointly contribute to a single generation. In particular, retrieval-based audits cannot measure the relative influence of different sources within the same output, nor can they detect stylistic patterns that persist without producing an explicit duplicate. 

Style Representation and Generative Control A second line of work evaluates stylistic imitation rather than exact duplication. Methods based on CLIP classification or learned style embeddings quantify whether generated images align with a target artistic style, including approaches that use CLIP-based similarity or classification [Radford et al., 2021] and learned style descriptors such as Contrastive Style Descriptors (CSD) [Somepalli et al., 2024]. Defensive approaches such as Glaze aim to disrupt such alignment by perturbing feature representations [Shan et al., 2023]. These approaches provide useful tools for measuring stylistic similarity at the level of individual images. However, style similarity is typically computed as a single-image embedding comparison, which conflates style with shared semantic content or layout. Prior work on neural style transfer and diffusion-based conditioning shows that reliable stylization requires separating content structure from style statistics [Gatys et al., 2015, Portilla and Simoncelli, 2000, Rombach et al., 2022a, Saharia et al., 2022a]. Where this style and content separation is an important requirement while evaluating style, alone these methods cannot provide a complete study to evaluate whether styles reappear across prompts without explicit attribution or how stylistic signals interact when multiple sources are present. 

Membership Inference and Data Leakage Signals A third line of work studies leakage through membership inference attacks, which estimate whether a given sample was part of the training dataset [Shokri et al., 2017, Hayes et al., 2019, Pang and Wang, 2023, Pang et al., 2025]. These methods typically assign scalar or binary membership scores to individual samples, often relying on auxiliary models or labeled member/non-member data. While membership scores indicate that training signals persist in the model, they remain inherently instance-level and do not capture how generative outputs are formed through the combination of multiple learned patterns. Diffusion models synthesize images through iterative denoising over distributed latent representations, where multiple sources can jointly influence the final output [Ho et al., 2020, Rombach et al., 2022a, Gu et al., 2023a]. Consequently, a high membership score does not imply that a corresponding style will consistently reappear during generation. More importantly, these methods cannot measure whether stylistic patterns emerge without explicit prompting, nor can they characterize how styles compete, combine, or dominate across different generation contexts. 

Image Generation Models and Training Datasets Large-scale text-to-image diffusion models such as Stable Diffusion v1.5 and Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL) are publicly documented to have been trained on subsets of the LAION-5B dataset, a web-scale corpus of image–text pairs constructed from Common Crawl URLs [Rombach et al., 2022a, Schuhmann et al., 2022]. Official model documentation confirms that Stable Diffusion v1.x models were trained on filtered subsets including LAION-2B-en, LAION-high-resolution, and LAION-Aesthetics [Rombach et al., 2022a]. The use of LAION-derived data has also been acknowledged in legal proceedings, including Andersen et al. v. Stability AI in the United States and Getty Images v. Stability AI in the United Kingdom, where it was treated as undisputed that Stable Diffusion models were trained on large-scale web-scraped image–text datasets containing copyrighted material [Andersen et al., 2023, Lindberg, 2024, High Court of Justice of England and Wales, 2025, Coulter, 2024]. While SDXL does not release a granular dataset manifest, Stability AI has stated that SDXL follows the same large-scale LAION-based data curation paradigm as earlier Stable Diffusion models [Stability AI, 2023]. In contrast, newer models such as SANA-1.5 do not publicly disclose their training datasets, reflecting a broader lack of dataset transparency in contemporary foundation model research rather than contradicting the established role of LAION-style corpora. The LAION datasets were constructed through automated scraping of publicly accessible web images and associated text using Common Crawl, followed by weakly supervised filtering based on CLIP 15 similarity, language detection, resolution constraints, and heuristic classifiers for aesthetic quality and NSFW content. Although LAION distributes only URLs and captions rather than hosting images directly, multiple studies note that semantic and stylistic information from the underlying images is nonetheless absorbed into model parameters during training [Rombach et al., 2022a, Carlini et al., 2023]. This emphasis on scale and diversity over manual curation results in datasets containing artworks, illustrations, photographs, stock imagery, and user-generated content spanning a wide range of artistic styles and creators. Subsequent analyses and investigations have highlighted significant issues with this data collection strategy. Empirical audits and journalistic investigations have shown that LAION subsets contain copyrighted artworks, recognizable characters, and works attributable to living artists, often without consent or licensing [Jiang, 2025, Wiggers, 2024]. These findings underpin ongoing copyright litigation against Stability AI and related entities [Andersen et al., 2023, High Court of Justice of England and Wales, 2025]. More critically, independent researchers and watchdog organizations reported the presence of harmful and illegal material, including suspected child sexual abuse material (CSAM), within portions of LAION-5B [Thiel, 2023, Cole, 2023]. In response, LAION removed known CSAM hashes, introduced stricter filtering, and released revised dataset versions with enhanced safety measures [LAION e.V., 2024]. However, these interventions occurred after earlier diffusion models had already been trained and cannot retroactively remove learned representations embedded in model parameters. This dataset lineage motivates the need for systematic auditing of stylistic behavior in generative models. Training on large-scale, weakly curated datasets such as LAION exposes diffusion models to dense concentrations of artworks and recurring stylistic patterns, which prior work suggests are internalized as distributed statistical regularities rather than explicit memorization [Rombach et al., 2022a, Carlini et al., 2023]. These stored stylistic traces may reappear during generation even when stylistic cues are not explicitly requested, leading to the silent appearance of recognizable stylistic features. Because such influence is neither directly observable in model parameters nor reliably captured by prompt-based qualitative analysis, existing evaluation approaches remain insufficient for disentangling explicit attribution, interaction, and unprompted stylistic re-emergence. To address this gap, Art Arena formalizes stylistic influence as a measurable construct, converting it into an empirical signal through structured comparisons. By doing so, Art Arena enables systematic auditing of stylistic leakage and provides insight into how large-scale training data shapes generative behavior, with applicability beyond text-to-image models to other generative modalities. 

A.3 Motif Extraction 

This section describes the process used to extract motifs for running Motif Duels , an essential evaluation method in ArtArena . For every artwork in the FitSet , we generate a content-only list of motifs using structured prompts (Figure 4) given to GPT-4o. These prompts instruct the model to identify only the concrete, visible elements in the image, such as objects, structures, symbols, and spatial components, while avoiding any references to style, artist identity, mood, medium, or lighting. The result is a clean, style-neutral motif list that represents the artwork’s content in a consistent and comparable way.         

> Motifs Extraction Prompt
> Instruction. Analyze the artwork "{artwork_name}" by "{artist_name}" and identify the most important motifs present in it. Consult reliable sources ( {source} ) to obtain the commonly used motif names and concise descriptions. Return the output in the following structure:
> [{artwork_name}: [{motif1: description}, {motif2: description}, ... ]]

16 Algorithm 1: Art Arena 

Input :Artworks: list of { title , artist , reference_image }. 

Model 𝑀 : text-to-image generator. 

Proximity: calibrated comparator for generated vs. reference images. 

Params: 𝐾 (generations), 𝑅 (rounds), 𝜏 𝑓 (fitness threshold), 𝛿 (margin). 

Output: : FitSet, Matches, Leaderboard  

> 1

Step 1: Early Trials (Fitness Test)  

> 2

foreach 𝑤 in Artworks do  

> 3

Prompt ← “<title(w)> in the style of <artist(w)> ”;  

> 4

Images ← Generate 𝐾 samples via 𝑀 (Prompt);  

> 5

Fit ← Average(Proximity(Images, reference_image( 𝑤 )));  

> 6

if Fit ≥ 𝜏 𝑓 then  

> 7

FitSet.add( 𝑤 ) 

> 8

Step 2: Motif Duels (Battleground)  

> 9

foreach 𝑤 in FitSet do  

> 10

Score[ 𝑤 ] ← 0; 

> 11

Motifs ← ExtractMotifs( 𝑤 );  

> 12

MotifSet[ 𝑤 ] ← sample 𝑟 motifs from Motifs;  

> 13

foreach ordered pair (𝑐, 𝑑 ) in FitSet, 𝑐 ≠ 𝑑 do  

> 14

DefenderTemplate ← “<title(e)> in the style of <artist(e)> ”;  

> 15

𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑠 _𝑐 ← 0; 𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑠 _𝑑 ← 0; 

> 16

for 𝑟 ← 0 to 𝑅 do  

> 17

Selected ← select 𝑟 th motif from MotifSet[ 𝑐 ];  

> 18

Prompt 𝑟 ← “<Selected as phrases> ” + DefenderTemplate;  

> 19

Images 𝑟 ← Generate 𝐾 samples via 𝑀 (Prompt 𝑟 );  

> 20

prox 𝑐 ← Average(Proximity(Images 𝑟 , reference_image( 𝑐 )));  

> 21

prox 𝑑 ← Average(Proximity(Images 𝑟 , reference_image( 𝑑 )));  

> 22

if (prox 𝑐 − prox 𝑑 ) > 𝛿 then  

> 23

𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑠 _𝑐 ++  

> 24

if (prox 𝑑 − prox 𝑐 ) > 𝛿 then  

> 25

𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑠 _𝑑 ++  

> 26

if 𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑠 _𝑐 > 𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑠 _𝑑 then  

> 27

Matches.append({pair: (𝑐, 𝑑 ), winner: 𝑐 }); Score[ 𝑐 ]++  

> 28

else  

> 29

if 𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑠 _𝑑 > 𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑠 _𝑐 then  

> 30

Matches.append({pair: (𝑐, 𝑑 ), winner: 𝑑 }); Score[ 𝑑 ]++  

> 31

else  

> 32

Matches.append({pair: (𝑐, 𝑑 ), winner: “draw”})  

> 33

Step 3: Influence Ledger (Leaderboard)  

> 34

Ledger ← SortByDescendingScore(Score);  

> 35

return {FitSet, Matches, Ledger}; 

Figure 4: Motif-Extraction Prompt : Prompt used to extract motif names and natural - language motif descriptions for an artwork, based on terminology commonly used in reliable art - historical sources. The sources used are mentioned in Figure 5. Museum & Institutional Sources for Motifs Extraction    

> Museum & Institutional Sources for Motifs Extraction
> Best for authoritative descriptions, curatorial language, and visual motifs
> 1. The Metropolitan Museum of Art (The Met) — Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History
> https://www.metmuseum.org
> Strengths: clear visual descriptions; motif -level analysis of gesture, composition, light, and material; especially strong for Caravaggio, Raphael, Warhol, and Monet.

17 2. Van Gogh Museum (Amsterdam) 

https://www.vangoghmuseum.nl 

Strengths: exceptionally detailed analysis of brushwork, colour, and rhythm; explicit ground, sky, and vegetation motifs; ideal for prompt-oriented extraction. 3. National Gallery (London) & National Gallery of Art (Washington) 

https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk | https://www.nga.gov 

Strengths: balanced formal and emotional descriptions; strong for portraits, interiors, and compositional motifs. 4. Musée d’Orsay (Paris) 

https://www.musee-orsay.fr 

Strengths: Impressionist & Post - Impressionist motif language; atmosphere, light, and seasonal landscape descriptions. 

High-Quality Secondary Art Databases 

Best for concise motif phrasing and comparative analysis 

5. WikiArt 

https://www.wikiart.org 

Strengths: aggregated descriptions across styles; quick identification of recurring motifs; good cross -artist consistency. 6. Artchive 

http://www.artchive.com 

Strengths: short, prompt-friendly summaries; emphasis on composition and movement. 7. WahooArt 

https://www.wahooart.com 

Strengths: plain-language visual descriptions; helpful for classical and Renaissance works. 

Scholarly / Curatorial Commentary 

Best for deeper motif interpretation 

8. Tate (UK) 

https://www.tate.org.uk 

Strengths: excellent for modern and contemporary art; clear explanations of abstraction, repetition, and symbolism. 9. MoMA (Museum of Modern Art) 

https://www.moma.org 

Strengths: essential for Pollock and Warhol; focus on process, material, and conceptual motifs. 10. Kröller-Müller Museum 

https://krollermuller.nl 

Strengths: landscape-focused Van Gogh analysis; strong treatment of ground, vegetation, and sky motifs. 

Art History & Analysis Sites 

Best for motif phrasing usable directly in prompts 

11. The Collector 

https://www.thecollector.com 

Strengths: accessible yet rigorous analysis; frequent discussion of symbolic and compositional motifs. 12. ArtUK 

https://artuk.org 

Strengths: British collections with strong descriptive metadata. 13. Google Arts & Culture 

https://artsandculture.google.com 

Strengths: high -resolution imagery with curatorial summaries; useful for spatial organisation and colour -field understanding. 

Figure 5: Sources used to extract motif names and descriptions as commonly referenced by curators, art historians, and authoritative museum databases. 

Motifs Blending Prompt (Challenger) 

Input: You need to generate prompts by blending the motifs from {content}. Motifs represent 

CONTENT ONLY (objects, structures, symbols, spatial elements). They do NOT represent style, artist identity, mood, or medium. 

Task: 

• Generate ALL non-empty combinations of the given motifs. If there are 𝑁 motifs, generate exactly (2𝑁 − 1) combinations. 

• Each combination must be used to construct ONE prompt. 

18 Style Influence Constraints:                  

> •The prompt MUST describe ONLY the motifs as visible scene content.
> •The prompt MUST be compatible with later injection of external style or artist tokens.
> •The prompt must be content-complete but stylistically neutral.
> Prompt Construction Rules: For each motif combination:
> •Describe a single coherent scene that includes all motifs.
> •Use literal, concrete, observational language.
> •No references to famous artists, art movements, or mediums.
> •No mood words (e.g., dramatic, surreal, expressive).
> •No composition embellishment beyond spatial relations strictly required to place motifs.
> •Do NOT infer symbolism beyond what is visually explicit.
> •Do not exceed 70 tokens per prompt.
> Output Format: Return STRICT JSON ONLY with the following structure.
> {"num_motifs": N, "expected_combinations": 2^N - 1, "items": [ {"combo_id": integer, "motifs": [exact motif strings], "content_prompt": "A single neutral content-only scene description suitable for style leakage testing.", "style_injection_slot": "{{STYLE_OR_ARTIST_TO_BE_INJECTED_LATER}}" }]}
> Ordering Constraints:
> •Sort combinations by increasing number of motifs (1 →N).
> •Preserve the original motif order inside each combination.
> •Do not repeat or merge combinations.
> Generate the output now

Figure 6: Motif-based challenger prompt construction : We enumerate motif combinations and blend them into coherent, style-neutral scene descriptions used as challenger prompts in Motif Duels. Including clear Style Influence Constraints and Prompt Construction Rules (refer Figure 6) in this process is important for separating content from style. Without these rules, extra clues like artistic terms, emotional language, or medium descriptors could unintentionally influence the behavior of image generation models, making it harder to tell whether the model understands the actual content of the scene. Our framework prevents this in three ways. First, it enforces a strict content-only vocabulary, ensuring that motifs are free of stylistic hints. Second, for a motif set of size 𝑁 , the method generates prompts for all non-empty combinations of motifs, producing exactly (2𝑁 − 1) prompts. This full combinatorial coverage helps reveal how models handle different content combinations without style interference. Third, the prompt rules require short, neutral descriptions that use only minimal spatial details, keeping the phrasing simple and style-free while also allowing later style injection when needed. Together, this motif extraction process and the controlled prompting rules create a reliable testing setup for Motif Duels. Each prompt acts as a focused test of whether a model can represent and 19 Table 3: Motifs extraction and blending . Extracted motifs and their blending to construct the prompt for the artwork. The list of extracted motifs and prompts for different artworks is provided in Table 7.             

> Artwork Motifs Prompt
> The Starry Night by Vincent Van Gogh Night sky, Village A dark sky with many stars above a small cluster of buildings at the base of the hills. Cypress tree, Swirling cloud band A tall tree mass in the foreground with a broad curved band of clouds crossing behind it. Church steeple, Night sky, Village A pointed steeple rising above clustered houses beneath a star-filled sky. Swirling cloud band, Night sky, Cypress tree A curved band of clouds moving across a starry sky with a tall tree mass in the foreground. Village, Cypress tree, Church steeple, Night sky A group of small buildings and a narrow steeple near a tall foreground tree under a dark starry sky.
> The Scream by Edvard Munch Figure on bridge, Waterbody A central figure standing on a bridge with a stretch of water visible beyond it. Bridge railing, Two distant figures, Horizon and landform A walkway with railings receding into depth and two small figures near a low horizon with landforms. Figure on bridge, Bridge railing, Horizon and landform A main figure on a bridge with horizontal planks and a distant low horizon of landmasses. Waterbody, Bridge railing A wide body of water seen past the receding railings of a wooden bridge. Figure on bridge, Two distant figures, Waterbody, Horizon and landform A central figure with two smaller figures farther back on a bridge overlooking water and a low horizon of landforms.

combine content correctly, while style remains fully separated. This enables precise measurement of style influence, consistent comparison across artworks, and a stable foundation for later experiments where style can be introduced independently of content. The following detailed sources (Figure 5) were used to retrieve the necessary motifs. In the above mentioned prompt, the agent is not just provided with the artwork name and the artist name but also with the artwork image for better capturing of motifs. 

A.4 Artworks and their extracted motifs 

In this section, we provide examples of the extracted motif corresponding to two of the most famous artworks namely "The Starry Night by Vincent Van Gogh" and "The Scream by Edvard Munch". The Table 7 describes the types of motifs extracted and the corresponding motifs descriptions for each of the motif. The Table 3 represent the crafted prompts corresponding to various combinations using the extracted motifs. The above mentioned Tables help us better understand how different motifs of the same artworks can be carefully combined, such that they semantically are correct. In the above visual results of the various motifs, their combinations illustrate that simply adding more motifs does not monotonically strengthen an artwork’s stylistic influence. Instead, the influence saturates, plateaus, or can even weaken depending on how well the model has internalized that artwork’s stylistic schema. This reinforces why the proposed Motif Duel setup is necessary: pairwise battleground evaluations reveal whether an artwork’s style genuinely exerts a deep, distributed pull on the model’s parameter space, or whether its influence collapses once motifs are hybridized with competing styles. By forcing artworks to confront one another as both challenger and defender, the duel framework exposes these asymmetric and nonlinear behaviors—showing which styles survive aggressive recombination and which dissipate under motif blending. Consequently, motif duels provide a more faithful measure of leakage potential than raw motif similarity alone, capturing how style representations behave when activated indirectly, competitively, and compositionally. 20 Table 4: Artworks in the FitSet for SD v1.5 for proximity: Semantics (CLIP), Aesthetics (LPIPS) and Fidelity (CSD). 

Rank Semantics (CLIP) Aesthetics (LPIPS) Fidelity (CSD) 1 Sunset on the Seine at Lavacourt, Winter Effect by Claude Monet Spam by Andy Warhol Olive Grove by Vincent van Gogh 2 The Three Trees, Autumn by Claude Monet Number 17 by Jackson Pollock A Group of Cottages by Vincent van Gogh 3 Autumn Effect at Argenteuil by Claude Monet Circumcision January by Jackson Pollock Entrance to the Public Garden in Arles by Vincent van Gogh 4 Crucifixion by Raphael Untitled (Green Silver) by Jackson Pollock Le Mas de Saint-Paul (A Meadow in the Mountains) by Vincent van Gogh 5 Madonna Litta (Madonna and the Child) by Leonardo da Vinci Mural by Jackson Pollock The Garden of Saint-Paul Hospital by Vincent van Gogh 6 Water Lilies Red by Claude Monet Sibyl Erithraea by Michelangelo Sistine Chapel Ceiling Waterloo Bridge, London by Claude Monet 7 Wheat Fields at Auvers Under Clouded Sky by Vincent van Gogh Ocean Greyness by Jackson Pol-lock Wheat Field at Auvers with White House by Vincent van Gogh 8 The Fall on the Road to Calvary by Raphael Birth by Jackson Pollock Avenue in the Park by Vincent van Gogh 9 Wheat Field with the Alpilles Foothills in the Background by Vincent van Gogh Chestnut Trees in Blossom by Vin-cent van Gogh (1887) Poppy Field in Giverny by Claude Monet 10 Olive Grove - Orange Sky by Vin-cent van Gogh The Beach at Sainte-Adresse by Claude Monet Flower Garden by Gustav Klimt 11 Pool with Waterlilies by Claude Monet Number 48 by Jackson Pollock Green Wheat Fields by Vincent van Gogh 12 Yachts At Argenteuil by Claude Monet Mask by Jackson Pollock Public Garden with Couple and Blue Fir Tree (The Poet’s Garden III) by Vincent van Gogh 13 Nude woman with turkish bonnet by Pablo Picasso Trees with Ivy by Vincent van Gogh The Sea Seen from the Cliffs of Fecamp by Claude Monet 14 Small Branch of the Seine by Claude Monet Lavacourt, Sun and Snow by Claude Monet Flowers on the Banks of Seine near Vetheuil by Claude Monet 15 Poppy Field in Giverny by Claude Monet Chestnut Tree in Blossom by Vin-cent van Gogh (1890) The Church at Auvers by Vincent van Gogh 16 Vase with Carnations and Other Flowers by Vincent van Gogh Houses of Parliament, Fog Effect by Claude Monet Weeping Woman by Pablo Picasso 17 Waves Breaking by Claude Monet Number 4 by Jackson Pollock Camille Monet and a Child in the Artist’s Garden in Argenteuil by Claude Monet 18 Vase of Peonies on a Small Pedestal by Edouard Manet Enchanted Forest by Jackson Pol-lock Daubigny’s Garden by Vincent van Gogh 19 Number 3 by Jackson Pollock Number 29 by Jackson Pollock Entrance to a Quarry near Saint Remy by Vincent van Gogh 20 Number 48 by Jackson Pollock Rorschach by Andy Warhol Flowering Garden by Vincent van Gogh 

21 Table 5: Artworks in the FitSet for SDXL for proximity: Semantics (CLIP), Aesthetics (LPIPS) and Fidelity (CSD) 

Rank Semantics (CLIP) Aesthetics (LPIPS) Fidelity (CSD) 1 Vincent’s Bedroom in Arles by Vincent van Gogh Sky Above Clouds IV by Georgia O’Keeffe Wheat Fields at Auvers Under Clouded Sky by Vincent van Gogh 2 Water Lilies by Claude Monet Black & White (Number 20) by Jackson Pollock Wheat Field with Reaper and Sun by Vincent van Gogh 3 Irises by Vincent van Gogh Mademoiselle Gachet in her gar-den at Auvers-sur-Oise by Vincent van Gogh View of Vessenots near Auvers by Vincent van Gogh 4 Wheat Field with Reaper and Sun by Vincent van Gogh Slightly Open Clam Shell by Geor-gia O’Keeffe The Garden of Saint-Paul Hospital by Vincent van Gogh 5 Olive Grove by Vincent van Gogh Wheat Field with Reaper and Sun by Vincent van Gogh Campbell’s Soup Cans by Andy Warhol 6 Olive Trees with Yellow Sky and Sun by Vincent van Gogh Impression, sunrise by Claude Monet Composition (White, Black, Blue and Red on White) by Jackson Pollock 7 Orchard in Bloom by Claude Monet The Sea at Saint-Adresse by Claude Monet Mademoiselle Gachet in her gar-den at Auvers-sur-Oise by Vincent van Gogh 8 Vase with Zinnias by Vincent van Gogh Tree with Ivy in the Asylum Gar-den by Vincent van Gogh The Kiss by Gustav Klimt 9 Blumengarten by Gustav Klimt Ice Floes on the Seine at Bougival by Claude Monet Vincent’s Bedroom in Arles by Vincent van Gogh 10 Still Life - Vase with Twelve Sun-flowers by Vincent van Gogh Lady with a Lap Dog by Rem-brandt Wheat Field at Auvers with White House by Vincent van Gogh 11 Bouquet of Sunflowers by Claude Monet White Aphrodisiac Telephone by Salvador Dali A Group of Cottages by Vincent van Gogh 12 Number 4 by Jackson Pollock Shadows on the Sea at Pourville by Claude Monet Still Life - Vase with Twelve Sun-flowers by Vincent van Gogh 13 Self Portrait with a Grey Felt Hat by Vincent van Gogh The Ploughed Field by Vincent van Gogh Untitled (From Marilyn Monroe) by Andy Warhol 14 The Fall on the Road to Calvary by Raphael Tomb of Giuliano de Medici by Michelangelo Starry Night Over the Rhone by Vincent van Gogh 15 Number 48 by Jackson Pollock Irises by Vincent van Gogh Field and Ploughman and Mill by Vincent van Gogh 16 Marilyn Monroe by Andy Warhol Mulberry Tree by Vincent van Gogh Marilyn Monroe by Andy Warhol 17 After Marilyn Pink by Andy Warhol Eyes in the Heat by Jackson Pol-lock Three Marilyns by Andy Warhol 18 David by Michelangelo Three female heads with one sleep-ing by Rembrandt After Marilyn Pink by Andy Warhol 19 Self Portrait with Felt Hat by Vin-cent van Gogh Bust of Brutus by Michelangelo Self Portrait with Pallette by Vin-cent van Gogh 20 Incredulity of Saint Thomas by Caravaggio Design for Julius II tomb (first version) by Michelangelo Number 4 by Jackson Pollock 

22 Table 6: Artworks in the FitSet for SANA-1.5 for proximity: Semantics (CLIP), Aesthetics (LPIPS) and Fidelity (CSD). 

Rank Semantics (CLIP) Aesthetics (LPIPS) Fidelity (CSD) 1 Green Coca Cola Bottles by Andy Warhol Echo (Number 25) by Jackson Pol-lock Convergence (Number 10) by Jackson Pollock 2 Christ on the Cross by Rembrandt Black & White (Number 20) by Jackson Pollock Marilyn Monroe by Andy Warhol 3 The Japanese Bridge (The Bridge in Monet’s Garden) by Claude Monet Number 32 by Jackson Pollock Cross by Andy Warhol 4 Water Lilies by Claude Monet Portrait of a Man by Rembrandt Beatles by Andy Warhol 5 Pathway in Monet’s Garden at Giverny by Claude Monet Tree with Ivy in the Asylum Gar-den by Vincent van Gogh Marilyn Blue by Andy Warhol 6 Portrait of Simonetta Vespucci (Portrait of a Young Woman) by Sandro Botticelli Daubigny’s Garden by Vincent van Gogh Coca-Cola (3) by Andy Warhol 7 Apple Trees on the Chantemesle Hill by Claude Monet Sistine Chapel Ceiling by Michelangelo Tree Trunks in the Grass by Vin-cent van Gogh 8 Coca-Cola (3) by Andy Warhol A lute player by Caravaggio Orange Prince by Andy Warhol 9 Pathway in Monet’s Garden at Giverny by Claude Monet Saint Jerome in Meditation by Car-avaggio Three Marilyns by Andy Warhol 10 Portrait with Pink and Blue Face by Henri Matisse Saskia Wearing A Veil by Rem-brandt After Marilyn Pink by Andy Warhol 11 Untitled (From Marilyn Monroe) pink by Andy Warhol The Garden of Doctor Gachet at Auvers-sur-Oise by Vincent van Gogh Haystacks in Provence by Vincent van Gogh 12 Galaxy by Jackson Pollock Portrait of a Man Wearing a Black Hat by Rembrandt The Garden of Doctor Gachet at Auvers-sur-Oise by Vincent van Gogh 13 Untitled (From Marilyn Monroe) blue by Andy Warhol Portrait of a Man in the Hat Deco-rated with Pearls by Rembrandt Marilyn Red by Andy Warhol 14 The Alpilles with Olive Trees in the Foreground by Vincent van Gogh Old Man in Prayer by Rembrandt Trees in the Asylum Garden by Vincent van Gogh 15 The Ascension Of Christ by Rem-brandt Cathedral by Jackson Pollock The Alpilles with Olive Trees in the Foreground by Vincent van Gogh 16 Marilyn Monroe by Andy Warhol Lighting Study of an Elderly Woman in a White Cap by Rem-brandt Trees in the garden of the Hospital Saint-Paul by Vincent van Gogh 17 A Corner of the Garden at Mont-geron by Claude Monet Crushed Campbell’s Soup Can (Beef Noodle) by Andy Warhol Daubigny’s Garden by Vincent van Gogh 18 After Marilyn Pink by Andy Warhol Portrait of a Bearded Man in Black Beret by Rembrandt Mademoiselle Gachet in her gar-den at Auvers-sur-Oise by Vincent van Gogh 19 Marilyn Blue by Andy Warhol Portrait of a Woman Wearing a Gold Chain by Rembrandt Sunny Lawn in a Public Park by Vincent van Gogh 20 Mickey by Andy Warhol Portrait of a seated man rising from his chair by Rembrandt Untitled (From Marilyn Monroe) by Andy Warhol 

23 Table 7: Examples of the extracted motif for different artworks.        

> Artwork Name Artwork Motifs
> The Starry Night by Vincent Van Gogh
> Night sky Swirling cloud band Village Church steeple Cypress tree
> Pool with Waterlilies by Claude Monet
> Water lilies Water reflections Natural vegetation
> The Scream by Edvard Munch
> Figure on bridge Bridge railing Two distant figures Waterbody Horizon and landform
> The Fall on the Road to Calvary by Raphael
> The Cross The Fallen Christ The Mourning Women Roman Soldiers
> The Ascension Of Christ by Rembrandt
> Central figure of Christ Cherubic angels Group of observers Vegetative motifs

A.5 Proximity metrics 

We measure proximity with three complementary metrics: CLIP cosine similarity [Radford et al., 2021, Hessel et al., 2021], Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) [Zhang et al., 2018], and Contrastive Style Descriptors (CSD) [Somepalli et al., 2024]. The presented set of proximity targets to capture distinct aspect of style. CLIP similarity captures high - level semantics and composition. It supports content level recall and text–image alignment [Radford et al., 2021, Hessel et al., 2021]. It has also been used for data attribution through embedding - space distribution analysis [Joshi et al., 2026]. It is used widely but is known to have limitations such as sensitivity to prompt wording, dataset biases, and weaker performance on fine - grained differences [Shao et al., 2023]. LPIPS measures perceptual closeness via deep feature distances. It reflects aesthetics properties such as structure and texture [Zhang et al., 2018]. LPIPS is often included in training objectives for diffusion and restoration to improve realism and to probe the perception–distortion tradeoff [Ho et al., 2022, Saharia et al., 2022b]. Recent studies have shown that it can be vulnerable to adversarial perturbations and may misalign with human judgments under distribution shift [Kettunen et al., 2019, Ghazanfari et al., 2023]. CSD encodes content - invariant style cues such as color palettes, texture statistics, and stroke patterns [Somepalli et al., 2024]. It serves as a style fidelity metric for image - driven style transfer [Xing et al., 2024] and as a pre - trained style embedding for cosine - similarity scoring against reference image to maintain style consistency [Mou et al., 2025]. The quality of the proximity score, depends on how diverse and well-covered the curated training dataset is, which was built by finding style tags in high -aesthetic LAION captions, removing overly common tags, dropping broken URLs, and deduplicating near-duplicate images while merging their tags. 24 (a) Reference (b) Generated with SD v1.5 

(c) Generated with SDXL 

(d) Generated with SANA-1.5 Reference vs SD v1.5 Reference vs SDXL Reference vs SANA-1.5 

Semantics 

Aesthetics 

Fidelity 

0.89 0.60 0.64 0.39 0.84 0.70 0.75 0.81 0.22 

Figure 7: Imitation of the artwork Impression, Sunrise by Claude Monet using the SDXL, SD v1.5, and SANA-1.5 text-to-image models. The prompt used for imitation was: “Impression, Sunrise in the style of Claude Monet.” We evaluate the degree of imitation using CLIP (Semantics), LPIPS (Aesthetics), and CSD (Fidelity). Higher CLIP and CSD scores indicate stronger imitation, whereas lower LPIPS scores indicate stronger imitation. Among the generated samples, image (c) appears visually closest to the reference image (a), exhibiting similar structural and stylistic characteristics, including color palette, objects placement, and finer details such as the reflection of the sun on the water, as collectively captured by the proximity-based metrics. Defender 2 

> Challenger
> Defender 2

Challenger  Defender 1         

> A significant portion of the
> sky illustrated in soft
> pastels showing subtle
> movement, harmonized by a
> palette of greens, purples,
> and blues in the style of
> Autumn Effect at Argenteuil by
> Claude Monet .
> Proximity(Semantics) Proximity (Semantics )
> Defender 1
> A significant portion of the sky
> illustrated in soft pastels
> showing subtle movement,
> harmonized by a palette of greens,
> purples, and blues in the style of
> Crucifixion by Raphael .

Challenger     

> Challenger
> Proximity (Semantic s)

Figure 8: Motif Duel for SD v1.5 evaluated under the semantic-based proximity (CLIP). The challenger contributes the motif which is paired with Defender 1 and Defender 2 to form two composite prompts. The generated images are then evaluated for proximity to both the challenger and the corresponding defender. The figure shows that the motif composed with different defenders yields stylistically distinct outputs as reflected in the proximity scores. 25 Defender 2 

Challenger 

Defender 2 

Challenger  Defender 1  

> A surface where paint is
> evenly distributed without a
> central focus, featuring
> rhythmic lines and overlapping
> layers showing motion in the
> style of Chestnut Tree in
> Blossom by Vincent van Gogh.

Proximity(Semantics) Proximity  ( Aesthetics  )

Defender 1   

> A surface where paint is evenly
> distributed without a central
> focus, featuring rhythmic lines
> and overlapping layers showing
> motion in the style of Houses of
> Parliament, Fog Effect by Claude
> Monet

Challenger 

Challenger 

Proximity  ( Aestheti  c s )Figure 9: Motif Duel for SD v1.5 evaluated under the aesthetics-based proximity (LPIPS). Lower score indicates better performance. The challenger contributes the motif which is paired with Defender 1 and Defender 2 to form two composite prompts. The generated images are then evaluated for proximity to both the challenger and the corresponding defender. The figure shows that the motif composed with different defenders yields aesthetically distinct outputs as reflected in the proximity scores. Defender 2 

Challenger 

Defender 2 

Challenger  Defender 1  

> A scene showing a focus on
> light and dark contrast,
> centered on the act of one
> figure's fingers probing the
> wound of another in the style
> of The Fall on the Road to
> Calvary by Raphael.

Proximity(Semantics) Proximity (Semantics) 

Defender 1  

> A scene showing a focus on light
> and dark contrast, centered on the
> act of one figure's fingers
> probing the wound of another in
> the style of Vincent's Bedroom in
> Arles by Vincent van Gogh.

Challenger 

Challenger 

Proximity (Semantics) 

Figure 10: Motif Duel for SDXL evaluated under the semantic-based proximity (CLIP). Higher score indicates better performance. The challenger contributes the motif which is paired with Defender 1 and Defender 2 to form two composite prompts. The generated images are then evaluated for proximity to both the challenger and the corresponding defender. The figure shows that the motif composed with different defenders yields semantically distinct outputs as reflected in the proximity scores. 26 Defender 2 

Challenger 

Defender 2 

Challenger  Defender 1 

A composition consisting of 

bright colors such as pink, 

yellow, and blue shown as 

smooth and uniformly filled 

areas without blending or 

texture  in  the style of  Number 

4 by Jackson Pollock. 

Proximity(Semantics) Proximity (Fidelity) 

Defender 1 

A composition consisting of bright 

colors such as pink, yellow, and 

blue shown as smooth and uniformly 

filled areas without blending or 

texture  in  the style of Starry 

Night Over the Rhone by Vincent 

van Gogh. 

Challenger 

Challenger 

Proximity (Fidelity) Figure 11: Motif Duel for SDXL evaluated under the fidelity-based proximity (CSD). Higher score indicates better performance. The challenger contributes the motif which is paired with Defender 1 and Defender 2 to form two composite prompts. The generated images are then evaluated for proximity to both the challenger and the corresponding defender. The figure shows that the motif composed with different defenders yields stylistically distinct outputs as reflected in the proximity scores. Defender 2 

Challenger 

Defender 2 

Challenger  Defender 1    

> Soft, rounded, white cloud forms
> arranged in a grid -like pattern over
> a subtle horizon where the sky meets
> the Earth, with a gradient sky
> transitioning from pale blue to soft
> pink near the horizon and a
> simplified and abstract depiction of
> natural elements below in the style
> of Slightly Open Clam Shell by
> Georgia O'Keeffe.

Proximity(Semantics) Proximity (Aesthetics) 

Defender 1      

> Soft, rounded, white cloud forms
> arranged in a grid -like pattern over a
> subtle horizon where the sky meets the
> Earth, with a gradient sky transitioning
> from pale blue to soft pink near the
> horizon and a simplified and abstract
> depiction of natural elements below in
> the style of Wheat field with reaper and
> sun by Vincent Van Gogh.

Challenger 

Challenger 

Proximity (Aesthetics) 

Figure 12: Motif Duel for SDXL evaluated under the aesthetics-based proximity (LPIPS). Lower score indicates better performance. The challenger contributes the motif which is paired with Defender 1 and Defender 2 to form two composite prompts. The generated images are then evaluated for proximity to both the challenger and the corresponding defender. The figure shows that the motif composed with different defenders yields aesthetically distinct outputs as reflected in the proximity scores. 27 Defender 2 

Challenger 

Defender 2 

Challenger  Defender 1    

> Coca -Cola bottles displayed in
> green tones, with their red
> logo visible at the bottom of
> each bottle in the style of
> Portrait of Simonetta Vespucci
> by Sandro Botticelli.

Proximity(Semantics) Proximity (Semantics) 

Defender 1      

> Coca -Cola bottles displayed in green
> tones, with their red logo visible
> at the bottom of each bottle in the
> style of Alpilles with Olive Trees
> in the Foreground by Vincent van
> Gogh.

Challenger 

Challenger 

Proximity (Semantics) Figure 13: Motif Duel for SANA-1.5 evaluated under the semantic-based proximity (CLIP). Higher score indicates better performance. The challenger contributes the motif which is paired with Defender 1 and Defender 2 to form two composite prompts. The generated images are then evaluated for proximity to both the challenger and the corresponding defender. The figure shows that the motif composed with different defenders yields semantically distinct outputs as reflected in the proximity scores. Defender 2 

Challenger 

Defender 2 

Challenger  Defender 1        

> Light filtered naturally
> through varied shadow zones to
> emphasize depth progression in
> the setting in the style of
> the Garden of Doctor Gachet at
> Auvers -sur -Oise by Vincent van
> Gogh.

Proximity(Semantics) Proximity (Fidelity) 

Defender 1  

> Light filtered naturally through
> varied shadow zones to emphasize
> depth progression in the setting in
> the style of Untitled (From
> Marilyn Monroe) by Andy Warhol

Challenger 

Challenger 

Proximity (Fidelity) 

Figure 14: Motif Duel for SANA-1.5 evaluated under the fidelity-based proximity (CSD). Higher score indicates better performance. The challenger contributes the motif which is paired with Defender 1 and Defender 2 to form two composite prompts. The generated images are then evaluated for proximity to both the challenger and the corresponding defender. The figure shows that the motif composed with different defenders yields stylistically distinct outputs as reflected in the proximity scores. 28 Defender 2 

> Challenger
> Defender 2

Challenger  Defender 1   

> A scene with a figure wearing
> dark clothing with visible
> textures, set against a simple
> dark background in the style
> of Sistine Chapel Ceiling by
> Michelangelo.
> Proximity(Semantics) Proximity (Aesthetics)
> Defender 1
> A scene with a figure wearing dark
> clothing with visible textures,
> set against a simple dark
> background in the style of
> Daubigny's garden by Vincent van
> Gogh.

Challenger 

> Challenger
> Proximity (Aesthetics)

Figure 15: Motif Duel for SANA-1.5 evaluated under the aesthetics-based proximity (LPIPS). Lower score indicates better performance. The challenger contributes the motif which is paired with Defender 1 and Defender 2 to form two composite prompts. The generated images are then evaluated for proximity to both the challenger and the corresponding defender. The figure shows that the motif composed with different defenders yields aesthetically distinct outputs as reflected in the proximity scores. 

(a) Challenger Artwork 

(b) Without defender template (DT) 

(c) DT: The Three Trees, Autumn by Claude Monet 

(d) DT: Autumn Effect at Argenteuil by Claude Monet 

(e) DT: Number 3 by Jackson Pollock 

(f) DT: Number 48 by Jackson Pollock 

Figure 16: Representative Motif Duel instance for SD v1.5 under semantics-based proximity, with a challenger artwork tested against four distinct defenders. The challenger artwork is Sunset on the Seine at Lavacourt, Winter Effect by Claude Monet and the motif-derived prompt is given by: “The scene features muted winter sunset light with pastel tones, a river reflecting shimmering light, a hazy softness over structures, and a winter landscape with sparse, bare trees.” Column (a) shows the challenger artwork. Column (b) shows the image generated using only the motif-derived prompt without any defender template (DT) . Columns (c) to (f) show images generated by combining the motif-derived prompt with different defender templates, where each defender template specifies a particular artwork and artist (refer Algorithm 1, step 2). 29 (a) Challenger Artwork 

> (b) Without defender template (DT)
> (c) DT: Water Lilies by Claude Monet
> (d) DT: Irises by Vincent van Gogh
> (e) DT: Self Portrait with Felt Hat by Vincent van Gogh
> (f) DT: Incredulity of Saint Thomas by Caravaggio

Figure 17: Representative Motif Duel instance for SDXL under semantics based proximity, with a challenger artwork tested against four distinct defenders. The challenger artwork is Vincent’s Bedroom in Arles by Vincent van Gogh and the motif-derived prompt is given by: “A room with a prominent yellow bed, plain wooden chairs with green cushions, and framed pictures on the walls featuring portraits and landscapes.” Column (a) shows the challenger artwork. Column (b) shows the image generated using only the motif-derived prompt without any defender template (DT). Columns (c) to (f) show images generated by combining the motif-derived prompt with different defender templates, where each defender template specifies a particular artwork and artist. 

> (a) Challenger Artwork
> (b) Without defender template (DT)
> (c) DT: Christ on the Cross by Rembrandt
> (d) DT: The Japanese Bridge by Claude Monet
> (e) DT: Marilyn Blue by Andy Warhol
> (f) DT: Mickey by Andy Warhol

Figure 18: Representative Motif Duel instance for SANA-1.5 under semantics-based proximity, with a challenger artwork tested against four distinct defenders. The challenger artwork is Green Coca Cola Bottles by Andy Warhol and the motif-derived prompt is given by: “Rows of repeating Coca-Cola bottles arranged in a flat layout, emphasizing a lack of visual depth or dimensional perspective.” Column (a) shows the challenger artwork. Column (b) shows the image generated using only the motif-derived prompt without any defender template (DT). Columns (c) to (f) show images generated by combining the motif-derived prompt with different defender templates, where each defender template specifies a particular artwork and artist.   

> (a) Semantics (b) Aesthetics (c) Fidelity

Figure 19: Sensitivity analysis of threshold (𝛿 ) used to award rounds for SD v1.5 with proximity (a) Semantics, (b) Aesthetics, and (c) Fidelity. The x-axis represents the different threshold values and the y-axis represent the number of artworks (defender and challenger) with at least one win. 30 (a) Semantics (b) Aesthetics (c) Fidelity 

Figure 20: Sensitivity analysis of threshold (𝛿 ) used to award rounds for SDXL with proximity (a) Semantics, (b) Aesthetics, and (c) Fidelity. The x-axis represents the different threshold values and the y-axis represent the number of artworks (defender and challenger) with at least one win. 

(a) Semantics (b) Aesthetics (c) Fidelity 

Figure 21: Sensitivity analysis of threshold (𝛿 ) used to award rounds for SANA-1.5 with proximity (a) Semantics, (b) Aesthetics, and (c) Fidelity. The x-axis represents the different threshold values and the y-axis represent the number of artworks (defender and challenger) with at least one win. Table 8: Influence Ledgers from Motif Duels for SDXL . Each table presents results in the order 

Semantic , Aesthetics , and Fidelity (top to bottom). Ranks are assigned by total wins, with challenger wins used as a tie-breaker. The tables on the right show rankings after fine-tuning, where ▲+x denotes improvements and ▼-x denotes declines in rank. Lower ranks indicate greater leakage potential. In the pre-trained setting (tables on the left), we display the top-3 and bottom-5 artworks, and we report their updated ranks following stylistic fine-tuning in the corresponding tables on the right. 

Rank Artwork (Pre-trained) Wins as Challenger Wins as Defender 

1 Vincent van Gogh, Vincent’s Bedroom in Arles 19 12 2 Claude Monet, Water Lilies 17 13 3 Vincent van Gogh, Wheat Field with Reaper and Sun 16 12 16 Andy Warhol, Marilyn Monroe 2 10 17 Michelangelo, David 4 718 Andy Warhol, After Marilyn Pink 2 919 Vincent van Gogh, Self Portrait with Felt Hat 1 10 20 Caravaggio, Incredulity of Saint Thomas 0 5

Rank Artwork (Post stylistic fine-tuning) 

1 Vincent van Gogh, Vincent’s Bedroom in Arles 

2 Claude Monet, Water Lilies 

4 Vincent van Gogh, Wheat Field with Reaper and Sun ▼-1 

15 Andy Warhol, Marilyn Monroe ▲+1 

16 Michelangelo, David ▲+1 

17 Vincent van Gogh, Self Portrait with Felt Hat ▲+2 

19 Andy Warhol, After Marilyn Pink ▼-1 

20 Caravaggio, Incredulity of Saint Thomas 

Rank Artwork (Pre-trained) Wins as Challenger Wins as Defender 

1 Georgia O’Keeffe, Sky Above Clouds IV 17 18 2 Jackson Pollock, Black & White (Number 20) 15 17 3 Georgia O’Keeffe, Slightly Open Clam Shell 17 14 16 Vincent van Gogh, Mulberry Tree 1 10 17 Jackson Pollock, Eyes in the Heat 1 918 Rembrandt, Three female heads with one sleeping 2 719 Michelangelo, Bust of Brutus 0 720 Michelangelo, Design for Julius II tomb (first version) 0 4

Rank Artwork (Post stylistic fine-tuning) 

1 Georgia O’Keeffe, Sky Above Clouds IV 

3 Jackson Pollock, Black & White (Number 20) ▼-1 

4 Georgia O’Keeffe, Slightly Open Clam Shell ▼-1 

15 Vincent van Gogh, Mulberry Tree ▲+1 

16 Rembrandt, Three female heads with one sleeping ▲+2 

18 Jackson Pollock, Eyes in the Heat ▼-1 

19 Michelangelo, Design for Julius II tomb (first version) ▲+1 

20 Michelangelo, Bust of Brutus ▼-1 

Rank Artwork (Pre-trained) Wins as Challenger Wins as Defender 

1 Vincent van Gogh, Wheat Fields at Auvers Under Clouded Sky 14 18 2 Vincent van Gogh, Wheat Field with Reaper and Sun 11 14 3 Vincent van Gogh, View of Vessenots near Auvers 9 14 16 Andy Warhol, Marilyn Monroe 3 12 17 Andy Warhol, Three Marilyns 1 14 18 Andy Warhol, After Marilyn Pink 1 13 19 Vincent van Gogh, Self Portrait with Palette 2 12 20 Jackson Pollock, Number 4 1 12 

Rank Artwork (Post stylistic fine-tuning) 

1 Vincent van Gogh, Wheat Fields at Auvers Under Clouded Sky 

3 Vincent van Gogh, View of Vessenots near Auvers 

5 Vincent van Gogh, Wheat Field with Reaper and Sun ▼-3 

11 Vincent van Gogh, Self Portrait with Palette ▲+8 

13 Andy Warhol, Three Marilyns ▲+4 

14 Andy Warhol, After Marilyn Pink ▲+4 

16 Jackson Pollock, Number 4 ▲+4 

18 Andy Warhol, Marilyn Monroe ▼-2 

31 Table 9: Influence Ledgers from Motif Duels for SANA-1.5 . Each table presents results in the order 

Semantic , Aesthetics , and Fidelity (top to bottom). Ranks are assigned by total wins, with challenger wins used as a tie-breaker. The tables on the right show rankings after fine-tuning, where ▲+x denotes improvements and ▼-x denotes declines in rank. Lower ranks indicate greater leakage potential. In the pre-trained setting (tables on the left), we display the top-3 and bottom-5 artworks, and we report their updated ranks following stylistic fine-tuning in the corresponding tables on the right. 

Rank Artwork (Pre-trained) Wins as Challenger Wins as Defender 

1 Green Coca Cola Bottles by Andy Warhol 19 16 2 Christ on the Cross by Rembrandt 19 12 3 The Japanese Bridge by Claude Monet 14 16 16 Marilyn Monroe by Andy Warhol 5 917 A Corner of the Garden at Montgeron by Claude Monet 5 818 After Marilyn Pink by Andy Warhol 3 919 Marilyn Blue by Andy Warhol 4 520 Mickey by Andy Warhol 1 1

Rank Artwork (Post stylistic fine-tuning) 

1 Green Coca Cola Bottles by Andy Warhol 3 Christ on the Cross by Rembrandt ▼-1 

4 The Japanese Bridge by Claude Monet ▼-1 

18 Marilyn Monroe by Andy Warhol ▼-2 

11 A Corner of the Garden at Montgeron by Claude Monet ▲+6 

13 After Marilyn Pink by Andy Warhol ▲+5 

19 Marilyn Blue by Andy Warhol 20 Mickey by Andy Warhol 

Rank Artwork (Pre-trained) Wins as Challenger Wins as Defender 

1 Jackson Pollock, Convergence (Number 10) 19 13 2 Andy Warhol, Marilyn Monroe 17 13 3 Andy Warhol, Cross 19 916 Vincent van Gogh, Trees in the garden of the Hospital Saint-Paul 7 617 Vincent van Gogh, Daubigny’s Garden 4 818 Andy Warhol, Untitled (From Marilyn Monroe) 1 10 19 Vincent van Gogh, Sunny Lawn in a Public Park 2 920 Vincent van Gogh, Mademoiselle Gachet in her garden at Auvers-sur-Oise 5 6

Rank Artwork (Post stylistic fine-tuning) 

1 Jackson Pollock, Convergence (Number 10) 

2 Andy Warhol, Cross ▲+1 

3 Andy Warhol, Marilyn Monroe ▼-1 

9 Vincent van Gogh, Sunny Lawn in a Public Park ▲+10 

15 Vincent van Gogh, Mademoiselle Gachet in her garden at Auvers-sur-Oise ▲+5 

17 Vincent van Gogh, Trees in the garden of the Hospital Saint-Paul ▼-1 

18 Andy Warhol, Untitled (From Marilyn Monroe) 

19 Vincent van Gogh, Daubigny’s Garden ▼-2 

Rank Artwork (Pre-trained) Wins as Challenger Wins as Defender 

1 Jackson Pollock, Echo (Number 25) 19 15 2 Jackson Pollock, Black & White (Number 20) 17 15 3 Jackson Pollock, Number 32 17 13 16 Rembrandt, Lighting Study of an Elderly Woman in a White Cap 4 817 Rembrandt, Portrait of a Bearded Man in Black Beret 4 618 Andy Warhol, Crushed Campbell’s Soup Can (Beef Noodle) 7 319 Rembrandt, Portrait of a Woman Wearing a Gold Chain 6 220 Rembrandt, Portrait of a seated man rising from his chair 6 1

Rank Artwork (Post stylistic fine-tuning) 

2 Jackson Pollock, Number 32 ▲+1 

3 Jackson Pollock, Black & White (Number 20) ▼-1 

4 Jackson Pollock, Echo (Number 25) ▼-3 

13 Rembrandt, Portrait of a Bearded Man in Black Beret ▲+4 

14 Rembrandt, Lighting Study of an Elderly Woman in a White Cap ▲+2 

15 Andy Warhol, Crushed Campbell’s Soup Can (Beef Noodle) ▲+3 

16 Rembrandt, Portrait of a seated man rising from his chair ▲+4 

19 Rembrandt, Portrait of a Woman Wearing a Gold Chain 

Table 10: Imitation–Motif Duel consistency for SD v1.5 under Semantics-based proximity . Rows index FitSet artworks (refer Table 4) as challengers and columns index FitSet artworks as defenders. Each cell records whether the winner under imitation matches the winner under motif-duel for that pair: ✓ if the challenger wins in both, ✓ if the defender wins in both, and ✗ if the outcomes disagree. Row, column, and total agreement counts are also reported for reference. 

Matrix Defender Win Count 

A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 A6 A7 A8 A9 A10 A11 A12 A13 A14 A15 A16 A17 A18 A19 A20 Challenger Defender 

Challenger 

A1 - ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ 8 0A2 ✓ - ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ 5 1A3 ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ 4 2A4 ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 1 3A5 ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ - ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 13 1A6 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ 6 5A7 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ 6 4A8 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 0 7A9 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ 3 8A10 ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 0 7A11 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ - ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 6 9A12 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ 2 11 A13 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 0 12 A14 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ 1 12 A15 ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ 3 8A16 ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ - ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ 1 10 A17 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ 0 13 A18 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✓ 2 5A19 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ 1 18 A20 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ - 0 18 

Win Count Challenger 0 0 2 0 1 0 1 3 2 3 3 6 1 6 2 4 12 5 4 7 209 Defender 17 15 11 14 14 13 12 10 9 9 8 4 6 2 4 4 2 2 0 0

32 Table 11: Imitation–Motif Duel consistency for SD v1.5 under Aesthetics-based proximity . Rows index FitSet artworks (refer Table 4) as challengers and columns index FitSet artworks as defenders. Each cell records whether the winner under imitation matches the winner under motif-duel for that pair: ✓ if the challenger wins in both, ✓ if the defender wins in both, and ✗ if the outcomes disagree. Row, column, and total agreement counts are also reported for reference. 

Matrix Defender Win Count 

A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 A6 A7 A8 A9 A10 A11 A12 A13 A14 A15 A16 A17 A18 A19 A20 Challenger Defender 

Challenger 

A1 - ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 17 0A2 ✗ - ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 15 0A3 ✗ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 14 1A4 ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 15 3A5 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 9 4A6 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 13 4A7 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 12 5A8 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 9 5A9 ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ 8 6A10 ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 8 6A11 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 8 9A12 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 7 8A13 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ 6 11 A14 ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 1 12 A15 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ 3 12 A16 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ 1 14 A17 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✓ 3 15 A18 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ - ✗ ✓ 1 13 A19 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ - ✓ 1 15 A20 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ - 0 18 

Win Count Challenger 0 1 0 2 4 4 4 6 8 3 8 9 11 11 13 9 13 14 13 18 312 Defender 14 18 17 13 13 12 10 9 11 9 8 7 7 4 3 1 2 2 1 0

Table 12: Imitation–Motif Duel consistency for SDXL under Semantics-based proximity . Rows index FitSet artworks (refer Table 5) as challengers and columns index FitSet artworks as defenders. Each cell records whether the winner under imitation matches the winner under motif-duel for that pair: ✓ if the challenger wins in both, ✓ if the defender wins in both, and ✗ if the outcomes disagree. Row, column, and total agreement counts are also reported for reference. 

Matrix Defender Win Count 

A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 A6 A7 A8 A9 A10 A11 A12 A13 A14 A15 A16 A17 A18 A19 A20 Challenger Defender 

Challenger 

A1 - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 16 0A2 ✗ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ 5 0A3 ✗ ✓ - ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ 11 1A4 ✗ ✓ ✗ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ 7 1A5 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ - ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 12 1A6 ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ 5 3A7 ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 12 5A8 ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ 10 2A9 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 0 8A10 ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ 3 6A11 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ 7 5A12 ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 1 9A13 ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ 1 10 A14 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ 1 13 A15 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ 2 13 A16 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ 2 15 A17 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✗ ✗ 1 16 A18 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ 1 16 A19 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ 0 18 A20 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - 0 19 

Win Count Challenger 0 1 1 2 0 0 2 5 6 1 5 6 5 9 7 8 9 12 6 12 258 Defender 11 16 12 12 10 14 11 12 10 10 9 7 7 5 5 4 3 2 1 0

Table 13: Imitation–Motif Duel consistency for SDXL under Aesthetics-based proximity . Rows index FitSet artworks (refer Table 5) as challengers and columns index FitSet artworks as defenders. Each cell records whether the winner under imitation matches the winner under motif-duel for that pair: ✓ if the challenger wins in both, ✓ if the defender wins in both, and ✗ if the outcomes disagree. Row, column, and total agreement counts are also reported for reference. 

Matrix Defender Win Count 

A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 A6 A7 A8 A9 A10 A11 A12 A13 A14 A15 A16 A17 A18 A19 A20 Challenger Defender 

Challenger 

A1 - ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 17 0A2 ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 13 1A3 ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 14 2A4 ✗ ✗ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 14 1A5 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 11 3A6 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ 7 5A7 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ 8 6A8 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 10 5A9 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ 5 7A10 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ 5 9A11 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ 3 6A12 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ 4 10 A13 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ 3 9A14 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 4 12 A15 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ 3 14 A16 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 0 12 A17 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✓ 2 15 A18 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✓ 2 16 A19 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ 1 18 A20 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - 0 15 

Win Count Challenger 0 1 1 0 3 2 6 3 4 3 5 10 7 10 9 7 11 10 16 18 295 Defender 18 17 17 13 15 13 7 11 11 7 6 8 6 6 4 4 3 2 1 0

33 Table 14: Imitation–Motif Duel consistency for SDXL under Fidelity-based proximity . Rows index FitSet artworks (refer Table 5) as challengers and columns index FitSet artworks as defenders. Each cell records whether the winner under imitation matches the winner under motif-duel for that pair: ✓

if the challenger wins in both, ✓ if the defender wins in both, and ✗ if the outcomes disagree. Row, column, and total agreement counts are also reported for reference. 

Matrix Defender Win Count 

A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 A6 A7 A8 A9 A10 A11 A12 A13 A14 A15 A16 A17 A18 A19 A20 Challenger Defender 

Challenger 

A1 - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ 13 0A2 ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ 6 1A3 ✗ ✗ - ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ 6 0A4 ✓ ✗ ✗ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ 5 1A5 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ 3 4A6 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 0 5A7 ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 3 3A8 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 0 7A9 ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ 6 4A10 ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ 2 7A11 ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ 2 7A12 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ - ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ 6 2A13 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ 2 11 A14 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ 2 7A15 ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 0 11 A16 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ 3 14 A17 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✗ ✗ 1 15 A18 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ 0 16 A19 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ 0 18 A20 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - 0 19 

Win Count Challenger 0 1 1 2 2 1 1 0 5 5 3 0 0 5 9 4 3 3 4 11 212 Defender 16 12 10 10 15 13 11 11 6 8 7 8 4 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

Table 15: Imitation–Motif Duel consistency for SANA-1.5 under Semantics-based proximity . Rows index FitSet artworks (refer Table 6) as challengers and columns index FitSet artworks as defenders. Each cell records whether the winner under imitation matches the winner under motif-duel for that pair: ✓ if the challenger wins in both, ✓ if the defender wins in both, and ✗ if the outcomes disagree. Row, column, and total agreement counts are also reported for reference. 

Matrix Defender Win Count 

A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 A6 A7 A8 A9 A10 A11 A12 A13 A14 A15 A16 A17 A18 A19 A20 Challenger Defender 

Challenger 

A1 - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 19 0A2 ✗ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 18 0A3 ✗ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 13 1A4 ✗ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 14 2A5 ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 11 2A6 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ 6 4A7 ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ 10 5A8 ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 12 2A9 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 9 4A10 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ 2 7A11 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ 3 9A12 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ 4 9A13 ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ 2 9A14 ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 6 5A15 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ 3 7A16 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ 2 12 A17 ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ - ✓ ✓ ✓ 3 8A18 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✗ 1 14 A19 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✓ 1 16 A20 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - 0 18 

Win Count Challenger 0 1 2 3 4 3 6 7 7 4 6 8 9 4 10 9 13 11 14 18 273 Defender 14 14 15 12 8 12 9 5 6 7 6 7 2 6 3 3 3 1 1 0

Table 16: Imitation–Motif Duel consistency for SANA-1.5 under Aesthetics-based proximity . Rows index FitSet artworks (refer Table 6) as challengers and columns index FitSet artworks as defenders. Each cell records whether the winner under imitation matches the winner under motif-duel for that pair: ✓ if the challenger wins in both, ✓ if the defender wins in both, and ✗ if the outcomes disagree. Row, column, and total agreement counts are also reported for reference. 

Matrix Defender Win Count 

A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 A6 A7 A8 A9 A10 A11 A12 A13 A14 A15 A16 A17 A18 A19 A20 Challenger Defender 

Challenger 

A1 - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 19 0A2 ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 16 1A3 ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 16 1A4 ✗ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 13 1A5 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 14 3A6 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ - ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 11 3A7 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 11 5A8 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 11 6A9 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ 8 8A10 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 6 9A11 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ 5 9A12 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ 5 9A13 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ - ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ 5 4A14 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ - ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 4 11 A15 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 5 11 A16 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ 2 13 A17 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ 0 15 A18 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✓ 2 17 A19 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ - ✓ 1 14 A20 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ - 0 17 

Win Count Challenger 0 1 1 3 3 3 5 4 8 9 5 10 12 11 10 10 12 13 17 17 311 Defender 17 17 15 12 13 13 11 11 9 7 8 4 3 5 5 4 1 1 1 0

34 Table 17: Imitation–Motif Duel consistency for SANA-1.5 under Fidelity-based proximity . Rows index FitSet artworks (refer Table 6) as challengers and columns index FitSet artworks as defenders. Each cell records whether the winner under imitation matches the winner under motif-duel for that pair: ✓ if the challenger wins in both, ✓ if the defender wins in both, and ✗ if the outcomes disagree. Row, column, and total agreement counts are also reported for reference. 

Matrix Defender Win Count 

A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 A6 A7 A8 A9 A10 A11 A12 A13 A14 A15 A16 A17 A18 A19 A20 Challenger Defender 

Challenger 

A1 - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 19 0A2 ✗ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 17 0A3 ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ 9 2A4 ✗ ✗ ✗ - ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 14 0A5 ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ - ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ 4 2A6 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 12 0A7 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ 4 6A8 ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ - ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ 6 3A9 ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ 3 4A10 ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ 2 7A11 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ 6 9A12 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ - ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ 5 9A13 ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ 2 7A14 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ 5 12 A15 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ - ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ 4 10 A16 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 0 15 A17 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - ✗ ✓ ✗ 1 15 A18 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ - ✓ ✗ 1 12 A19 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ - ✗ 0 11 A20 ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ - 0 12 

Win Count Challenger 0 1 2 3 4 5 3 5 7 4 4 7 7 6 5 8 11 10 14 8 250 Defender 16 15 9 13 9 10 7 10 10 10 5 4 7 2 3 1 3 1 1 0

35