Title: Regional Climate Model Emulation with Diffusion Approaches: What is the Added Value of Generative Machine Learning?

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.14570v1

Published Time: Mon, 15 Jun 2026 01:13:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES) 

# Regional Climate Model Emulation with Diffusion Approaches: What is the Added Value of Generative Machine Learning? 

Mikel N. Legasa 1,2, Antoine Doury 3, Achille Gellens 1,2, Redouane Lguensat 2,Clara Naldesi 1,2,4, Soulivanh Thao 1,2, Mathieu Vrac 1,2

> 1

Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l’Environnement (LSCE), CEA/CNRS/UVSQ, Universit´ e Paris Saclay, UMR8212, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France 

> 2

Institut Pierre-Simon Laplace (IPSL), FR636, Paris, France 

> 3

CNRM, Universit´ e de Toulouse, M´ et´ eo-France, CNRS, Toulouse, France 

> 4

Autorit´ e de sˆ uret´ e nucl´ eaire et de radioprotection, PSE-ENV/SCAN/BEHRIG, F-92260, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France 

Key Points:  

> •

We introduce ParamDiffusion, a cost-efficient two-stage diffusion-based framework for regional climate model emulation.  

> •

We propose a novel target-based validation framework, with extreme events, to intercompare four emulators, including two diffusion models.  

> •

Diffusion models excel at capturing climatological statistics, but their uncertainty envelopes fail to capture some extreme rainfall events. 

Corresponding author: Mikel N. Legasa, mikel.legasa@lsce.ipsl.fr 

–1–  

> arXiv:2606.14570v1 [physics.ao-ph] 12 Jun 2026 manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

Abstract 

Emulators provide a cost-effective alternative to regional climate models (RCMs) by sta-tistically capturing their dynamical downscaling function. They link large-scale predic-tors simulated by global climate models (GCMs) to RCM-simulated high-resolution fields of the target variable, here precipitation. Machine learning methods, typically deep learn-ing, are cheaper than running RCMs in computation time and energy. Among them, gen-erative models are appealing because they can simulate ensembles of local high-resolution fields consistent with the predictors. This ensemble, which we call the uncertainty en-velope , remains to be properly assessed for added value. Here, we make three contribu-tions. First, we introduce ParamDiffusion, a new two-stage diffusion-based framework, and compare it with a state-of-the-art diffusion approach. Second, we expand standard validation through a comprehensive framework aligned with climate-science needs, ex-amining specific precipitation events, including extremes. Third, within this framework, we assess the added value of diffusion approaches relative to deterministic methods. We intercompare four deep-learning models: a deterministic model designed to capture the precipitation tail; a parametric probabilistic model based on it; a recently proposed dif-fusion approach; and ParamDiffusion, which couples the parametric model with a dif-fusion model. Our results show that diffusion-based approaches reproduce climatolog-ical precipitation statistics with high skill, including distributional tails and spatially com-pounded extremes, while generating spatially detailed fields. However, none of the as-sessed models consistently accounts for the most extreme RCM-simulated events within its uncertainty envelope. Diffusion models are therefore promising for probabilistic RCM emulation, but substantial progress is still required before they can reliably represent high-impact precipitation extremes. 

## Plain Language Summary 

Regional climate models are used to simulate local climate variables such as pre-cipitation at high resolutions, but they are expensive to run. A cheaper alternative is to train machine learning/artificial intelligence emulators to reproduce their precipita-tion fields from large-scale atmospheric conditions. In this study, we assess whether a class of generative artificial intelligence models, called diffusion models, can provide not only realistic precipitation maps, but also a useful range of possible precipitation pat-terns for a given atmospheric situation, thus allowing for the exploration of uncertainty. We also introduce ParamDiffusion, a new approach, and compare it with a direct dif-fusion model, a simpler probabilistic model, and a model designed specifically for pre-cipitation that produces only one precipitation map. We evaluate the models using long-term precipitation statistics and a detailed analysis of selected precipitation events, in-cluding severe extremes. Diffusion models reproduce long-term precipitation statistics well and generate spatially detailed precipitation fields. They also often improve over the single-map emulator for individual events. However, the most intense and localized precipitation extremes are not always well captured. Diffusion models are therefore promis-ing tools for fast climate-model emulation with uncertainty, but more work is needed to capture the most severe precipitation extremes. 

## 1 Introduction 

Global climate models (GCMs), the primary tools for studying future climates, re-quire downscaling to bridge their coarse resolution to local scales. By employing machine learning, emulators (Chadwick et al., 2011; Babaousmail et al., 2021; Bo´ e et al., 2023; Doury et al., 2023; Rampal et al., 2024) aim to provide a cost-effective alternative to re-gional climate models (RCMs). They do so by statistically replicating their dynamical downscaling function, therefore constituting a so-called hybrid methodology. Emulators work by empirically linking a set of large-scale predictors, well simulated by GCMs, to  

> –2– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

RCM-simulated high-resolution fields of the variable of interest, such as precipitation, the focus of this work. Downscaling precipitation poses notable difficulties: it is inter-mittent, positively skewed, spatially complex, and strongly influenced by many differ-ent local and large-scale processes (Vrac & Naveau, 2007; Maraun et al., 2010; Vandal et al., 2017; Doury et al., 2024). In this study we build and evaluate the RCM-emulators in the perfect model framework meaning that both predictors and targets come from the same RCM. Even in this context, the large-scale predictors provide insufficient informa-tion to fully determine the high-resolution precipitation fields. From the emulator’s per-spective, the downscaling function is therefore intrinsically uncertain (Rampal et al., 2025). Capturing this uncertainty is particularly important under a changing climate, where local precipitation extremes are among the most relevant events to society and ecosys-tems (Clarke et al., 2022) but also challenging to predict and treat statistically. This uncertainty highlights the limits of deterministic emulators, that is, methods that predict a single precipitation field from the large-scale predictors. Over the last few years, deep learning methods have shown considerable skill for climate downscaling and RCM emulation (Vandal et al., 2017; Vaughan et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Doury et al., 2023, 2024). Deterministic models necessarily produce a single field for each large-scale state, and therefore must make a compromise, producing smoothed precipitation fields, and overall under representing extremes. This is especially the case when emu-lators are trained to minimize loss functions not well suited to precipitation, such as the mean squared error (Doury et al., 2024; Tomasi et al., 2025; Addison et al., 2026). Loss functions designed specifically for precipitation, two of them explored in the present ar-ticle, partly address this problem by better accounting for the shape of its distribution. However, the problem remains that deterministic models are unable to capture the un-certainty of the downscaling function. This makes generative machine learning models a sensible alternative to tackle the problem, since they can represent the conditional distribution of high-resolution fields rather than collapse them into a single best point estimate. This has made them gain much attention in recent years (Mardani et al., 2025; Rampal et al., 2025; Schillinger et al., 2025; Tomasi et al., 2025; Addison et al., 2026). Among them, diffusion models have become a prominent modeling framework. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (Song et al., 2021, DDPM) are a generative machine-learning framework to learn the proba-bility distribution of the data by progressively corrupting samples with Gaussian noise. A deep learning model, typically a U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015), acts as a backbone 

and is trained to learn to reverse this process. This backbone can subsequently be used for the generation of new samples via iterative denoising. Note that, throughout this ar-ticle, we use the term diffusion as an umbrella term for this broader family of iterative generative models stemming from DDPM, including recent variants that differ in their precise training objective, stochastic process, or sampling formulation. They can be con-ditioned on large-scale predictors to act as RCM-emulators and are appealing for down-scaling: they produce highly spatially-detailed samples that represent probability dis-tributions rather than single deterministic fields, thus enabling large ensembles of down-scaled realizations at substantially lower costs than those required to run an RCM. How-ever, they are still more computationally demanding than state-of-the-art determinis-tic machine learning approaches, and the extent of their added value when downscaling GCM simulations still remains an open question. In recent studies, diffusion models have started to demonstrate a lot of potential in weather and climate applications. Addison et al. (2026) introduced a conditional dif-fusion emulator for daily precipitation from convection-permitting simulations, showing realistic spatial structures and skill when simulating extremes. Tomasi et al. (2025) pro-posed to use a latent diffusion model for kilometer-scale downscaling over Italy, for wind and temperature. Mardani et al. (2025) introduced CorrDiff, a residual corrective dif-fusion framework with a deterministic model to predict the expected value and a diffu- 

> –3– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

sion model to learn the residuals around it, finding promising results. Other studies have proposed diffusion frameworks or other generative methods such as GANs (generative adversarial networks) for emulation and downscaling (Aich et al., 2024; Hess et al., 2024; Bassetti et al., 2024; Rampal et al., 2024; Schillinger et al., 2025). Together, these stud-ies show how generative methods are gaining widespread attention in the context of cli-mate downscaling and their potential. What remains less settled is how these models and their added value with respect to deterministic references should be evaluated, especially for precipitation. Existing stud-ies often demonstrate improvements in visual realism, spatial detail, climatological dis-tributions, or selected extreme summaries (Mardani et al., 2025; Tomasi et al., 2025; Ad-dison et al., 2026). While these diagnostics are valuable, they do not fully answer whether the conditional stochastic ensemble produced by the diffusion model is an informative uncertainty envelope given the large-scale conditions. This distinction matters, since a generative model can faithfully reproduce climatological tails and realistic-looking fields but may fail to assign probabilities correctly for specific large-scale conditions, which goes both ways: they may hallucinate realities not really possible, or not fully simulate ex-tremes when these are consistent with the large-scale predictors’ state. We believe, thus, that the central question when assessing generative emulators is not whether or not sam-ples look realistic, but whether their conditional distribution is informative for climate analysis. In particular, one of the most interesting features of a generative model is their potential to generate climate extremes consistent with the large-scale predictors’ state. For such cases, deterministic models have to compromise on a specific fixed field, which, by definition, will not be an extreme. In this regard, however, the choice of determin-istic reference is also important, with studies such as Addison et al. (2026) having only compared their diffusion approach against a deterministic U-Net trained with mean squared error as loss function. This has been clearly shown to perform poorly (Doury et al., 2024), and thus we believe the added value of diffusion models may be overstated. If this is the case, the relevant question becomes sharper: do diffusion models add value beyond a com-petitive deterministic model, and if so, what is the extent of the added value? This study addresses this question, over mainland France and northeast Spain and under the perfect model framework (both predictors and predictands come from the same RCM simulation), following Doury et al. (2024). Our contribution with this article is both on the diffusion methodology and on the evaluation. First, we propose a two-step dif-fusion model methodology that relies on a high-resolution representation of precipita-tion fields together with their uncertainty, expressed in a Bernoulli-Gamma distribution. This modeling approach is inspired by other two-step approaches such as the one in Mardani et al. (2025), and completely separates the deterministic information in the large-scale predictors and the uncertainty envelope. This results in a substantially computationally cheaper as well as potentially more transferable approach. With respect to the evalu-ation, on top of traditional evaluation methods such as power spectral density or clima-tologies, we assess how informative the uncertainty cloud generated by diffusion-based RCM emulators actually is. More specifically, this study aims to assess whether diffu-sion approaches provide added value by taking into account specific precipitation tar-gets of interest to the climate community, such as extremes. This evaluation is performed by using a state-of-the-art deterministic precipitation model adapted to capture the tail of the precipitation distribution, a parametric model directly based on it, and two dif-fusion models: our proposed approach, ParamDiffusion, as well as the state-of-the-art diffusion model proposed in Addison et al. (2026). By doing so, we aim to provide not only a comprehensive model intercomparison, but also move forward towards a more comprehensive validation framework for gener-ative climate emulation.  

> –4– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

## 2 Experimental Framework and Methods 

2.1 Experimental Framework 

The experimental framework adopted in this study follows that of Doury et al. (2024). The RCM emulated is ALADIN63 (Nabat et al., 2020), driven by CNRM-CM5 (run r1i1p1), within the EURO-CORDEX framework (Coppola et al., 2021), at a spatial resolution of around 12.5 km. The domain considered for this study is composed of 64x64 gridpoints covering most of mainland France and a small part of northeast Spain (4 º West - 4 º East, 42 º North - 50 º North, see Figure 1). We work within a perfect-model setting, in which both predictors and target fields are derived from the same RCM simulation. The large-scale predictors (geopotential, humidity, temperature, eastward and northward wind com-ponents at 850, 700, 500 hPa level pressures, as well as sea level pressure) are obtained by conservatively coarsening the RCM fields to a typical GCM resolution (around 150 km, covering the domain -10 º West - 20 º East, 36 º North - 57 º North), following Doury et al. (2024), and are then used as input to emulate the corresponding high-resolution RCM precipitation field. This strategy isolates the RCM downscaling function from ad-ditional sources of uncertainty associated with GCM–RCM inconsistencies, which may otherwise limit transferability in so-called imperfect frameworks (Bano-Medina et al., 2023; Bo´ e et al., 2023; van der Meer et al., 2023). It also provides us a controlled benchmark in which we consider the RCM-simulated precipitation fields as the reference truth that the emulators should reproduce. Importantly, this setup does not imply that the downscaling relationship is deter-ministic from the emulator’s perspective: although an RCM produces a single high-resolution realization for a given large-scale atmospheric state, the predictors contain incomplete information about local precipitation at higher resolution. State-of-the-art determinis-tic emulators therefore provide a useful point estimate, but their skill remains limited, with an average spatial spearman correlation of around 0.83 after removing the seasonal cycle (for our current domain), leaving some unresolved variability. The goal of using a diffusion model is precisely to characterize this conditional uncertainty envelope around the expected high-resolution field, rather than improving the mean prediction. This study focuses on the evaluation within the perfect model framework, that is, in perfect conditions . Once trained and in final application, emulators are meant to be applied to the GCM-simulated large-scale variables; however, in this study, we are only assessing the capability of models to perfectly replicate the downscaling function. Through-out the whole article, models are trained with data from the Historical plus RCP8.5 sce-narios, thus the combined years from 1951 to 2100. Subsequently, the trained models are applied to predictors from the RCP4.5 scenario, for the period 2005-2100. All the eval-uations and results shown in this article, in Section 3, correspond to simulations and pre-dictions performed for the evaluation period. This framework tests the models on un-seen data and, although it is not the main objective of this article, it also explores trans-ferability to other scenarios. 

2.2 Models 

We list in this section the four deep learning methods considered in this work, with a subsection dedicated to each of them. They are also summarized in Table 1. Note that all of them have been trained with Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) keeping 10% of the training data as validation set to early stop the algorithm once no further improve-ment was observed for the specific loss function of each method. 

2.2.1 Asym: Determinist U-Net Model for Precipitation 

Doury et al. (2023) developed a deep learning RCM emulator specifically designed to capture the RCM downscaling process of temperature, employing the well-known U- 

> –5– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

Net architecture (Ronneberger et al., 2015), essentially an encoder–decoder architecture with skip connections. Subsequently, in Doury et al. (2024) this model was upgraded to downscale precipitation fields, mainly by updating the loss function for the semicontin-uous and highly skewed distribution of precipitation. Beyond the spatial atmospheric predictors, the architecture includes a dense neural network that processes a series of non-spatial predictors, such as seasonal indicators, external forcings, and spatial summary statistics of the input fields. The dense-neural network output is concatenated with the spatial representation at the bottleneck of the U-Net. We consider this model the state-of-the-art deterministic deep learning model for RCM emulation of precipitation. Note that the original model contains approximately 28 million trainable param-eters. In this work, we found the exact configuration in Doury et al. (2024) to be sub-optimal and overly complex for our specific experimental framework and thus we have performed a hyperparameter optimization. Qualitatively, the model remains the same, with the following changes: instead of the 4 contractive and expansive blocks (with 64, 128, 256, 512 kernels) used in the original article; we use only 2 blocks with 32 and 64 kernels. The scalar predictors’ processing block also uses 2 dense layers with 16, 32 neu-rons, instead of the 4 (with 64, 128, 256, 512 neurons) in the original article. This re-sults in an architecture with a substantially lower number of parameters (around 390000 trainable parameters, thus around ∼ 1.4% the size of the original model), and yields slightly better results (the comparison is not shown). We refer the reader to Doury et al. (2024) for further details. 

2.2.2 B-Gamma: Parametric Bernoulli-Gamma U-Net 

Following from the previous section, we can devise a straightforward probabilistic/generative approach, which we call B-Gamma throughout this article, by upgrading the U-Net to output the parameters of a Bernoulli-Gamma distribution. The idea to output the pa-rameters of a Bernoulli-Gamma mixture distribution with a neural network was proposed by Cannon (2008), and has been widely applied for statistical downscaling as output for different machine learning models (Carreau & Vrac, 2011), including random forests (Legasa et al., 2022, 2023) and convolutional neural networks (Ba˜ no-Medina et al., 2020). Our B-Gamma model is a compact U-Net trained to minimize the negative log-likelihood as loss function to output the parameters of a Bernoulli-Gamma distribution for precipi-tation. It has the exact same architecture as Asym, except for the last layer, which out-puts 3 fields: p, α and β gridpoint parameters of the Bernoulli and Gamma distributions of precipitation. These parameters can be subsequently used to draw samples from the corresponding Bernoulli-Gamma distribution (refer to, e.g., Cannon (2008), for the de-tails). We observe an important issue with this model: simulations from parametric mod-els like this one produce inconsistent fragmented spatial patterns, which can clearly be seen in Figure 1 (see the B-Gamma samples). Note that this same modeling framework, pointwise parametric formulation for gridded datasets (no matter the architecture e.g., Carreau and Vrac (2011); Ba˜ no-Medina et al. (2022); Rampal et al. (2022); Soares et al. (2024); Legasa et al. (2026)), is poorly suited for spatially coherent emulation and down-scaling: although it may reproduce marginal distributions at individual gridpoints, the conditional spatial independence implicit assumption prevents the model from generat-ing physically plausible fields. Nevertheless, this model is still useful, since it provides a realistic description of gridpoint-based statistics. In addition, it serves as background model for the diffusion model explained in the next section. The full model description and configuration can be found in the GitHub repository ( https://github.com/MNLR/Diffusion ). Note that we refer to this model as generative throughout this article when we assess simulations drawn from its predicted distribution.  

> –6– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

2.2.3 ParamDiffusion: Diffusion on the parametric output of B-Gamma 

The model we propose, which we name ParamDiffusion, follows a two-step approach, and was inspired by residual diffusion-based methods (Mardani et al., 2025). In essence, the first step involves using B-Gamma, detailed in the previous section, to predict the high-resolution Bernoulli-Gamma fields describing the local precipitation distributions for each day. Subsequently, a diffusion model is conditioned on these parameters to pro-duce spatially realistic precipitation samples. We consider, therefore, that the informa-tion in the large-scale predictors on the pointwise precipitation is, as observed and shown later in the results, well captured by B-Gamma. This includes its gridpoint uncertainty, so we task the diffusion model with capturing the spatial distribution together with its uncertainty cloud. Note that, differently from the model proposed in Mardani et al. (2025) our diffusion model is neither residual nor it uses large-scale information directly, but relies on a high-resolution representation of precipitation fields together with their un-certainty, expressed in the Bernoulli-Gamma distribution. In the remainder of this sec-tion, we overview the technical details of the diffusion step of the modeling approach. The diffusion step consists of a conditional denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM, Ho et al. (2020)). During training, Gaussian noise is progressively added to trans-form high-resolution precipitation fields into a standard normal distribution, while a de-noising deep learning model (the backbone ) is simultaneously trained to reverse the pro-cess, conditional on the fields predicted by B-Gamma. The conditioning fields are there-fore not the original large-scale atmospheric predictors, but a high-resolution and com-pact probabilistic representation of precipitation obtained from the Bernoulli-Gamma model. As backbone, we use a U-Net architecture, receiving as conditioning 64 ×64 Bernoulli-Gamma fields, with three resolution levels and attention layers at the lowest-resolution stages, with 15 724 929 trainable parameters. The model uses 1000 diffusion steps with a squared-cosine noise schedule, proposed in Nichol and Dhariwal (2021). At inference time, simulations are generated by starting from Gaussian noise fields and iteratively ap-plying the reverse diffusion process, conditional on the B-Gamma output for the target day. Each reverse trajectory produces one spatially coherent precipitation realization. The full model description and configuration can be found in the GitHub repository ( https:// github.com/MNLR/Diffusion ). Note that, although reducing the number of steps is an option when doing inference without a substantial loss in performance, we intentionally kept them at 1000 to compare our ParamDiffusion against the diffusion approach explained in the next subsection. 

2.2.4 CPMGEM: Direct Conditional Diffusion 

The second diffusion model approach, called CPMGEM (for Convection-Permitting Model Generative Emulator), was recently proposed for RCM emulation in Addison et al. (2026). Although in the present study we are not emulating a convection permitting RCM, we keep this same name throughout the article to avoid confusion. The model is based on the so-called NCSN++ backbone (Noise Conditional Score Network: a U-Net, see Ho et al. (2020)) within a sub-variance-preserving stochastic differential equation for-mulation (Song et al., 2021), and samples are generated by solving the reverse stochas-tic differential equation using the Euler–Maruyama method (Bayram et al., 2018). Dif-ferently to ParamDiffusion, CPMGEM generates stochastic high-resolution precipitation fields directly conditioned on coarse-resolution atmospheric predictors, and is therefore trained to represent the full downscaling function. To do so, the coarse predictor vari-ables are first regridded to the target grid using nearest-neighbour interpolation and then concatenated with the noisy target precipitation field at each denoising step. We have used this model as is, by running the code provided together with the article by Addison et al. (2026). In total, the backbone U-Net for CPMGEM has around 63 million param-eters, around 4 times the number of parameters of ParamDiffusion, but uses the same  

> –7– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

number of denoising steps: 1000. We refer the reader to Addison et al. (2026) for fur-ther details. Together, ParamDiffusion and CPMGEM represent the two mainly used diffusion-based strategies for RCM emulation, which can be broadly framed as two-stage or one-stage formulations. ParamDiffusion represents the former: a comparatively simple first-stage model extracts the predictable large-scale component, while the diffusion model is tasked with representing the remaining conditional uncertainty envelope with spatial accuracy. By contrast, CPMGEM follows a one-stage formulation, in which the diffu-sion model is tasked with capturing the full downscaling function, that is, the complete mapping from large-scale predictors to high-resolution precipitation. Therefore, the com-parison in this article assesses not only architectural and computational differences, but also the implications of assigning the full downscaling task to the generative model it-self versus employing a background model to first extract all information from the large-scale predictors. 

2.3 Evaluation Methods 

We use a comprehensive set of evaluation methods to study how the four models described in the previous section perform. They can be divided in two categories: the climatological metrics, intended as a baseline overall assessment of the models consid-ered, and computed over the whole evaluation period; and the targeted analysis, in which we take 8 specific days of special relevance to climate science and perform an in-depth analysis of the added value of generative methods. The results section (Section 3) is di-vided accordingly, into sections 3.1 and 3.2. The metrics are explained next, and sum-marized in Table 2. The first set of metrics is standard in literature. First, we evaluate the root mean squared error (RMSE). In the case of the diffusion models, we use their expected value, obtained by averaging 50 simulations. Although this is not the intended use of gener-ative approaches, it provides a basic estimate of the models’ capacity to preserve the de-terministic component of the downscaling function. We then evaluate relative biases for several representative statistics: the percentage of dry days (Dry%), and, considering only day–gridpoint pairs with precipitation exceeding 1 mm (hereafter referred to as wet day-gridpoints), the mean (Mean), standard deviation (SD), median (Median), and 99th per-centile of precipitation (P99). In the case of the generative models, the metrics are the average of 50 simulations: 50 simulations are drawn, a statistic is computed from each, and the expected value for the statistic is shown. Traditionally, these metrics have been evaluated per gridpoint. This, however, can potentially hide significant model flaws and offers an incomplete picture of model per-formance. We propose here to pair gridpoint-per-gridpoint bias analyses with an addi-tional assessment that allows us to address also the spatial performance for each statis-tic: prior to computing the statistic (e.g., P99) we apply a 3x3 average moving window to both the reference and simulated/predicted field. Subsequently, we compute the met-ric for the resulting field, that now also encompasses local spatial information due to the local averaging. As we show in the results section, this relatively simple method is a pow-erful tool that can address each statistic’s compounded spatial aspect (e.g., the spatial tail for the 3x3 P99). Note that, the larger the window, the less spatially local the as-pect analyzed and, on the limit, it corresponds to domain-wide spatial statistics. We have performed this analysis on other spatial scales (e.g., 16x16) and the results are similar to those obtained using a 3x3 moving window. For studies with bigger domains, we con-sider that combining different window sizes is a sensible approach to assess biases at dif-ferent scales. We finalize the climatological analysis with the radially averaged power spec-tral density (RAPSD, Harris et al. (2001); Sinclair and Pegram (2005)), which compares  

> –8– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

the complexity of structures (that is, the variability over different spatial scales) produced by different approaches. The remaining metrics are computed specifically for 8 dates selected from the val-idation period (RCP 4.5, 2005-2100) and are aimed to evaluate the uncertainty envelope generated by diffusion models. The first five targets correspond different forms of pre-cipitation extremes, which are particularly relevant for assessing whether the models can reproduce situations with substantial potential impacts (Clarke et al., 2022). These in-clude the day with the highest precipitation aggregated over the whole domain, and the day with the highest precipitation over any gridpoint. The dates for the last three, named 

Historical, Mid-future and End-Future were chosen in Doury et al. (2024) arbitrarily, and serve us to represent also three standard targets. A detailed description and statistics of the eight target days can be checked in Table 3. We show three of these targets in Fig-ure 1, together with the prediction/simulations made by each model. This figure also serves to illustrate three distinct predictive situations: the first target (panel a) is already well handled by the deterministic models, with visually adequate amount of detail and well-adjusted values. The second target (panel b) contains extreme values of precipitation, above 250 mm, which are not reached by deterministic approaches. The last target (panel c) illustrates cases in which deterministic models fall short, producing predictions that are smoothed out with respect to their reference. Note that, this figure also illustrates the spatial fragmentation in simulations made by the B-Gamma model. We have also analyzed other targets, but they were left out of the main article to focus on the most representative. For example, extreme dry targets (targets with no wet gridpoints) are overall very well reproduced by all models: very precisely by the deterministic model and with almost no variability for generative models. To assess these targets we use a combination of metrics and figures. Note that, to fully explore the distributions produced by the generative models, all these metrics are computed from 1000 simulations drawn for the large-scale predictors corresponding to each target. First, we compute continuous ranked probability scores (CRPS, Gneiting and Raftery (2007)). CRPS is a proper scoring rule that measures the discrepancy be-tween the predictive distribution and the observed value. CRPS is expressed in the same units as the reference variable (here precipitation in millimeters per day), and collapses to the mean absolute error (MAE) if the prediction is deterministic, so it allows for a comparison with point predictions. Together with the CRPS maps, we include out-of-envelope error maps and SAL (structure-amplitude-location) diagrams. The out-of-envelope error maps illustrate if the target values are beyond or inside the distributional limits of the generative models, and how far (above or below) in mm if they do so. That is, for the RCM-simulated (reference) precipitation value for a spe-cific gridpoint y, we compute, for a set of simulations Sm produced by a model m for a specific day, 

y − max ˆy∈Sm (ˆ y) if y > max ˆy∈Sm (ˆ y),y − min ˆy∈Sm (ˆ y) if y < min ˆy∈Sm (ˆ y),

0 if y ∈ [min ˆy∈Sm (ˆ y), max ˆy∈Sm (ˆ y)] .

A 0 in this metric means that the target reference value is within the distributional lim-its produced by the generative models. As for the climatological metrics, we also plot the out-of-envelope error maps with prior 3x3 moving averages, which allows us to over-come the limitation of gridpoint-based statistics. Indeed, this spatial smoothing makes the diagnostic less sensitive to isolated gridpoint mismatches and more focused on whether the models cover coherent precipitation structures at a local spatial scale. The final assessment is done by means of the SAL diagrams (Wernli et al., 2008). The SAL diagrams aim to evaluate how close are two precipitation fields when looking at the characteristics of so-called precipitation objects , beyond fixed gridpoint or local statistics. Broadly speaking, precipitation objects are continuous fields of precipitation  

> –9– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

over a specific threshold within a domain. The threshold is set as suggested in the follow-up article Wernli et al. (2009) and as in Doury et al. (2024): at 1 /15th of spatial quan-tile 95. A SAL score, shown as a 3-dimensional diagram, shows three metrics indicat-ing properties of these precipitation objects, in essence (check Wernli et al. (2008) for a detailed mathematical description): structure, evaluating their size and shape; ampli-tude, their average precipitation amounts; and location, evaluating their geographical locations. If all objects are similar to the reference RCM-simulated ones, the three com-ponents will be close to 0. The SAL diagrams are used in the present study to assess the shape of the distribution of objects within a precipitation field, as generated by diffu-sion approaches, and compared against the objects generated by the deterministic model. 

## 3 Results 

This section is divided into two parts. In Section 3.1, we perform a climatological evaluation of the models considered. In Section 3.2, we analyse the uncertainty envelopes produced for selected target events (Table 3) and assess their added value. Recall that all models are trained using data from the Historical and RCP8.5 sce-narios, covering the combined period 1951–2100, and are then applied to predictors from the RCP4.5 scenario over the period 2005–2100. Therefore, all evaluations, including the selected target events, correspond to simulations and predictions performed for this in-dependent evaluation period. We therefore treat the RCM-simulated statistics and val-ues as the truth against which the models are evaluated, and refer to them as the ref-erence throughout the text and figures. We also refer to models capable of producing stochastic simulations (B-Gamma, CPMGEM, and ParamDiffusion) as generative , for simplicity. Unless explicitly stated otherwise, generative models are assessed by sampling from them: 50 simulations are used for the full evaluation period in Section 3.1, whereas 1000 simulations are drawn from each generative model for each target event in Section 3.2. 

3.1 Climatological Analysis 

In this section we perform a climatological analysis of the models considered. We recall that, here, climatology refers to a statistic measured over the whole evaluation pe-riod. In terms of predictive performance, as measured by the RMSE, the average (spa-tially) RMSE is 3 .5, 3.48 , 3.18, and 3 .29 respectively, for Asym, B-Gamma, CPMGEM, and ParamDiffusion. Asym and B-Gamma perform almost equally, with both diffusion approaches not only keeping up with the performance, but also slightly improving it: on average ∼ 0.3 ( ∼ 0.2) mm with respect to ParamDiffusion (CPMGEM). With respect to both diffusion models, CPMGEM performs slightly better than ParamDiffusion (on average 0.11 mm). Considering the difference in the number of parameters and cost in ParamDiffusion (approximately one quarter of the simulation cost), we think this is a good compromise. This is also true for Asym and B-Gamma, which have around 2 .5% the total number of trainable parameters of the backbone of ParamDiffusion and around 0.6% those of CPMGEM, and allow for simulations/predictions almost instantly. The backbone of both diffusion approaches also have additional more complex mechanisms such as attention, which could potentially improve this result, but this is beyond the scope of this article.  

> –10– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

Biases at the gridpoint level and in spatial distributions over the whole evaluation period are shown in Figures 3 and 4. When it comes to the percentage of dry days (%Dry) and mean precipitation over wet days (Mean) in Figure 3, all models perform well. This is both for the gridpoint statistics and the local spatial ones (i.e., 3x3 statistics), with the exception of the B-Gamma model, which fails to capture the spatial means, espe-cially for the average rainfall, and exhibits a dry bias of around 10% on average. Some minor wet and dry biases are observed for Asym and B-Gamma, respectively, while both diffusion approaches reproduce these statistics, including their spatial aspects, realisti-cally. Biases on more complex statistics of the distribution are clearly more difficult to capture for all models. Looking at all the panels for both diffusion models together, it is clear that they excel at capturing distributional aspects, as has been reported in other studies. Interestingly, SD and P99 biases for the Asym model are reduced slightly when looking at 3x3 maps. This is not the case for the Median, for which biases are slightly higher. The combination of dry and wet biases present in Asym indicates biases in the shape of the distribution, rather than a consistent bias. Nevertheless, for Asym, biases in the most ambitious climatological statistic assessed in this study, P99, are relatively contained, with 5th spatial percentile being −13%. Contrary to what many studies re-port, this highlights how deterministic models trained to optimize a loss function well adapted for precipitation, can capture the tail of the distribution reasonably well. Con-sidering the substantially lower training time and the almost immediate prediction time (compared to the hours or days needed for the diffusion models, see Table 1), this should be taken into account. Finally, the spatial pixelation effect observed already for the B-Gamma model is again present here, for the SD and P99. In Figure 5, we show the domain averaged distributions of wet gridpoints, as per-centage, and spatial rainfall on wet days (over 1 mm). The distribution of wet gridpoints is captured by the three generative models, with Asym exhibiting some moderate bias in the shape of the distribution. When it comes to the average rainfall, the four mod-els perform well for the lower half of the distribution, with Asym overestimating domain-wide higher percentiles and B-Gamma underestimating them. The overestimation effect seen in Asym likely comes from the cost function aiming at higher values of the gridpoints’ distribution, with the bias for B-Gamma coming from the spatial fragmentation, that renders the model incapable of capturing domain wide precipitation. Both diffusion ap-proaches generate very realistic distributions up to very high quantiles, so, in panel (c), we have zoomed in on the tail and assess quantiles up to 0 .999 probability on wet days. Both diffusion models have very similar performance and slightly underestimate the dis-tribution by a maximum of 1 mm of precipitation in quantiles beyond 97%. Finally, to conclude this climatological analysis, we address the RAPSD in Figure 6, in order to compare the variability over different spatial scales produced by different approaches, thus indicating whether models produce the right amount of detail as com-pared to the reference RCM-simulated precipitation fields. Asym falls behind when rep-resenting higher frequency details (beyond 300km), with B-Gamma simulations show-ing inconsistent RAPSD values due to the spatial fragmentation. Diffusion-based approaches produce very realistic detail levels at all scales, which is consistent with previous stud-ies (Addison et al., 2026; Mardani et al., 2025). Overall, notably, both diffusion approaches perform similarly in all climatological aspects considered. Considering the substantial differences between both approaches, this leads us to conclude that this is a systematic result, rather than a model-dependent fea-ture.  

> –11– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

3.2 Targeted Uncertainty Envelope Analysis 

As explained in Section 2.3, the climatological analysis is insufficient for fully un-derstanding how generative approaches perform when faced by specific extreme situa-tions. The previous section showed that diffusion models faithfully reproduce the clima-tologies, including their spatial counterparts. However, the extent of the added value of the additional spatial details produced remains to be properly assessed. Then, in this section, we focus on the target RCM-simulated precipitation fields selected in Section 2.3 and detailed in Table 3. We recall that the most interesting feature of a generative emulator is perhaps their potential to generate climate extremes consistent with the large-scale predictors’ state. In this cases deterministic models have to compromise on a spe-cific fixed field, which, by definition, will not be an extreme. The analysis performed in this section approaches the problem from complemen-tary angles. The out-of-envelope error maps in Figure 7 provide a simple way to assess whether the reference values fall within the distributional limits produced by each model; that is, whether such extreme instances, which are known to be possible under the cor-responding large-scale conditions, can be simulated by the diffusion approaches. Com-plementing this analysis, Figure 8 shows the CRPS scores for the four models assessed in this work, while the SAL diagrams in Figure 9 provide a final event-based assessment of precipitation objects produced by the two diffusion models. By construction, deter-ministic models are not expected to reproduce the most extreme target fields exactly. Therefore, we consider that a generative model adds value if it fulfills the following three conditions: the uncertainty cloud covers the observed values (Figure 7), its ensemble of simulated precipitation objects shifts the distribution of SAL scores towards the origin in the three dimensions considered (structure, amplitude, and location, Figure 9), all while remaining controlled and avoiding unrealistic values, that is, preserving predictive skill as measured by CRPS (Figure 8). The out-of-envelope error maps in Figure 7, which are shown after applying a 3 ×3moving average prior to the computation (the same figure, without the 3x3 moving av-erage, is provided in the supporting information file: Figure S1), show that both CPMGEM and ParamDiffusion generally produce uncertainty envelopes that include the target pre-cipitation fields over most of the domain: out-of-envelope errors are usually sparse and spatially limited. For targets such as Max % Wet, Drizzle, and Historical, the reference fields are almost entirely contained within the simulated ranges. In these cases, the ob-served RCM field can therefore be interpreted as a plausible realization of the conditional distribution learned by the diffusion models. Note that these three targets exhibit com-paratively low precipitation values and that, generally, they are already accurately pre-dicted by deterministic approaches. The most challenging cases are the targets with intense and localized precipitation structures, notably Wettest Gridpoint. For Wettest, Wettest Gridpoint, Highest SD, and End-Future, some out-of-envelope errors can be seen for the highest-intensity areas. These out-of-envelope errors indicate that the diffusion models do not always fully cover the upper tail of the conditional precipitation distribution, especially when extreme values are spatially concentrated. Depending on the target, each diffusion approach behaves dif-ferently: for instance, for Mid-future, CPMGEM fails to capture in its uncertainty en-velope a precipitation object in the south of the domain, which is not the case of ParamD-iffusion. Conversely, in other cases, such as Highest SD, we see that ParamDiffusion pro-duces a distribution that is too wet, thus observing some negative out-of-envelope errors in the southeast of the domain. In any case, out-of-envelope errors remain much more localized for both diffusion approaches if we compare them to the error for determinis-tic reference, with diffusion models, as expected, representing a wider range of outcomes, even though without reaching the extreme values observed. For example, in the case of Wettest Gridpoint, we observe that the maximum error made by Asym is 148.7 mm, clearly falling short to predict the extreme storm in the southeast. For the two diffusion mod- 

> –12– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

els, this is greatly reduced: For CPMGEM these values are 54.9 mm (maximum) and 21.4 mm (on average, spatially); whereas for ParamDiffusion, the best scoring model for this specific case, they are 50.6 mm (maximum) and 10.5 mm (on average, spatially). We observe also how the B-Gamma model presents incoherent distributions, con-sistent with the qualitative analysis in Figure 1. Note, however, that B-Gamma produces the most realistic uncertainty envelope in terms of out-of-envelope error in a gridpoint-based analysis (see Figure S1 in the supporting information file), which validates its use for gridpoint analyses and as background model for ParamDiffusion. The CRPS maps in Figure 8 confirm that, naturally, the largest probabilistic er-rors occur for the most intense targets. Wettest, Highest SD, and End-Future show the highest errors across models, with maxima attained in the same regions where the ref-erence field contains the strongest precipitation. This confirms that a challenge remains to reproduce the conditional intensity distribution of extreme events. Across targets, the diffusion models improve over the deterministic reference in all cases. This improvement is particularly clear for the most extreme cases, where the spatial mean CRPS of CP-MGEM and ParamDiffusion is substantially lower than the MAE of Asym. ParamDif-fusion reaches the lowest spatial mean score for Wettest and Mid-future, while CPMGEM performs slightly better for some localized targets such as Max % Wet and Wettest Grid-point. We confirm that the differences between the two diffusion models are therefore event-dependent rather than systematic. ParamDiffusion appears somewhat more con-trolled in several cases, whereas CPMGEM sometimes allows a broader range of local outcomes. Overall, we consider that no model ranks best. Note that we also provide the analogous to Figure 8, without the 3x3 moving average, in the supporting information file: Figure S2. Finally, we analyze the SAL diagrams in Figure 9. For Wettest and Max % Wet (i.e., first two rows), interestingly, the deterministic reference (Asym) already behaves well and very close to the origin, and both CPMGEM and ParamDiffusion generate rel-atively compact ensembles that stay close to the origin. This is desirable, since we con-sider that, for targets already well captured by deterministic models, the simulated en-semble should remain close to the origin rather than introducing unnecessary dispersion or degradation. Moreover, for the last target (End-future), where Asym performs poorly, we observe a behavior indicative of added value for diffusion models: both diffusion ap-proaches produce an ensemble of simulations that clearly tilts towards the origin, that is, towards realistic precipitation objects. Notably, this happens for the structure score, which confirms, mathematically, the visual improvement in the shape and detail we see for this target in Figure 1 (panel c). In the case of Wettest Gridpoint, a very localized extreme, the cloud is much more dispersed and moves towards the origin, although some simulations show larger location errors, indicating that intense precipitation objects can be generated but are sometimes placed in an inadequate location (specially for ParamDiffusion), confirming that the mod-els are not perfectly capturing the full uncertainty, as we saw in the previous figures. This is consistent with the CRPS maps, where errors remain concentrated around high-intensity structures, and with the out-of-envelope error maps, where we see errors localized around the strongest precipitation areas. The target Highest SD is halfway: the deterministic model already works relatively well in this case, and the distribution produced by dif-fusion models stays close to the origin, but some simulations exhibit unjustifiable both structure and location scores, notably for CPMGEM. The Drizzle case highlights a dif-ferent limitation: although absolute precipitation amounts are low and CRPS values re-main small, the SAL diagrams show a relatively broad spread in structure and ampli-tude. We clearly see that low-intensity precipitation objects are easy to capture by the deterministic models, with diffusion models (see e.g., panel a) in Figure 1) generating a distribution of samples too wide and not necessarily consistent with the large-scale pre-dictors. The uncertainty clouds produced for Historical and Mid-future are more cen- 

> –13– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

tered around the origin for ParamDiffusion, which is consistent with the analysis per-formed in the previous two figures, where CPMGEM exhibited higher out-of-envelope error values. 

## 4 Conclusions and Discussion 

This study provides a comprehensive assessment of diffusion-based approaches for precipitation emulation in a perfect-model framework. We evaluated whether genera-tive models can add value beyond state-of-the-art deterministic emulators by produc-ing meaningful uncertainty envelopes conditioned on large-scale atmospheric predictors. To this end, we intercompared a deterministic precipitation emulator specifically designed for capturing the tail of the precipitation distribution (Asym), a parametric Bernoulli–Gamma probabilistic model (B-Gamma), a direct conditional diffusion benchmark (CPMGEM), and our proposed two-stage ParamDiffusion framework. Beyond the model intercompar-ison, we make two specific contributions. First, we introduce ParamDiffusion as a 2-stage generative framework that separates the extraction of the predictable large-scale signal (including its uncertainty) from the generation of the spatially consistent conditional un-certainty envelope. Second, we also propose a comprehensive and more thorough vali-dation framework for generative precipitation emulators, combining climatological di-agnostics with a targeted event-based analysis of selected precipitation fields of special relevance to climate scientists. This targeted analysis is a central contribution of this work, since it directly assesses, in detail, whether the simulated uncertainty envelope contains plausible realizations of specific extreme RCM-simulated events, whether probabilistic errors are reduced, and whether the simulated precipitation objects are realistic in struc-ture, amplitude, and location. The first conclusion is that diffusion models provide added value when represent-ing climatologies regardless of the approach considered. The deterministic component of the downscaling function is already well captured by the Asym model, which in prac-tice remains highly competitive despite its much lower computational cost. Diffusion ap-proaches moderately improve this metric, arguably due to a much more complex back-bone. Indeed, both diffusion approaches reproduce the distributional properties of pre-cipitation with high realism for the whole evaluation period, and this result is not re-stricted to pointwise gridpoint statistics. The same conclusion holds when the diagnos-tics are computed after applying a local spatial aggregation, showing that the diffusion models capture not only marginal precipitation distributions, but also the local spatial aspects of precipitation. The similarity in climatological performance, exhibited by both diffusion approaches and despite their substantial methodological differences, suggests that the high performance shown in this article is a property of diffusion-based precip-itation emulation. This is a key difference with respect to parametric models like B-Gamma, which produce realistic gridpoint distributions but not spatially-consistent precipitation fields. With respect to the specific targets analyzed, we show that good climatological be-havior and visually realistic spatial precipitation fields do not guarantee that the con-ditional upper tail of extreme events is correctly captured. For several moderate or al-ready well-predicted targets, the diffusion models generate uncertainty envelopes that contain the reference RCM field over most of the domain, reduce probabilistic errors rel-ative to the deterministic baseline (in terms of CRPS scores), and produce precipitation objects that remain close to the reference, as measured by the SAL scores. This confirms that diffusion models can provide meaningful event-scale uncertainty information. In these cases, the generated ensemble does not merely add variability, it represents plausible al-ternative realizations compatible with the large-scale atmospheric situation. However, the most intense and localized events remain challenging. For targets with extreme pre-cipitation structures, the diffusion models substantially reduce the errors made by the deterministic emulator, but they do not fully solve the problem. These results highlight  

> –14– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

a central difficulty of stochastic precipitation emulation: generating visually realistic look-ing extremes is not enough. The extremes must also be generated with the correct in-tensity, spatial structure, and location for the specific large-scale atmospheric state. None of the models assessed here fully achieves this for the most severe targets. This limitation has direct implications for the interpretation of generative down-scaling models. Diffusion models clearly improve the realism of simulated precipitation fields and provide more informative uncertainty estimates than deterministic approaches. Yet, they should not be considered reliable generators of the most severe precipitation extremes solely because they reproduce climatological tails or visually detailed fields. Stan-dard diagnostics such as RMSE, mean bias, or RAPSD are therefore insufficient to val-idate generative climate emulators. They must be complemented by diagnostics that ex-plicitly assess the conditional uncertainty envelope, as is done in this study. Thus, tar-geted event-based analyses provide a necessary counterpart and we argue that it should become a standard component of the evaluation of generative emulators, alongside tra-ditional climatological diagnostics. Overall, our results show that diffusion models, no matter the approach, are pow-erful tools for generative RCM emulation, and capture reliably climatological uncertainty, generating spatially coherent ensembles that preserve distributional properties. Never-theless, as said before, their main objective is not simply to add more small-scale tex-ture or improve visual realism. Learning the conditional upper tail of precipitation ex-tremes remains a challenge: when an extreme event is possible under a given large-scale atmospheric situation, the emulator should be able to generate it. This should be achieved without the model generating situations incompatible with the large-scale predictors’ state, generally referred to in literature as hallucinations (Aithal et al., 2024). Until this is achieved, diffusion-based emulators should be viewed as powerful tools for probabilistic climato-logical emulation, but not yet as fully reliable substitutes for RCMs in the simulation of the most severe localized precipitation extremes. Note that this should be taken into account considering that diffusion models are computationally expensive and require hours to generate a single member, versus the almost immediate generation that models such as Asym can achieve. This study also highlights how CPMGEM and ParamDiffusion per-form very similarly across most climatological diagnostics, despite substantial differences in formulation, conditioning strategy, number of parameters, and computational cost. Finally, we foresee several other lines of future work, including the study of hal-lucinations, mentioned before, and physical inconsistencies. We plan to also expand this work to assess other steps in the modeling chain and study how different models behave when transferred to GCM-simulated large-scale fields. Also, the reduction of computa-tional costs and expanding this study to other generative methods (such as flow match-ing methods, see Albergo and Vanden-Eijnden (2023); Lipman et al. (2023)) is an im-portant research perspective. We note that, although this work has focused on precip-itation, the same modeling strategy is not restricted to this variable. Preliminary exper-iments with maximum daily temperature, as well as applications to other geographical domains, showed very promising performance. This suggests that the framework gen-eralizes well to other climate variables and regions and will be addressed in future work. 

## Open Research Section 

All the code necessary to reproduce the results has been made available on GitHub: 

https://github.com/MNLR/Diffusion . Similarly, all the data necessary to reproduce the results can be found on Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20610814 .

## Conflict of Interest declaration 

The authors declare there are no conflicts of interest for this manuscript.  

> –15– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

Acknowledgments 

This study has received funding managed by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche un-der France 2030 bearing the references ANR-22-EXTR-0005 (TRACCS-PC4-EXTENDING project) and ANR-22-EXTR-0011 (TRACCS-PC10-LOCALISING project). This project was provided with computing AI and storage resources by GENCI at IDRIS thanks to the grant 2025-AD010116371 on the supercomputer Jean Zay’s V100 partition. It also benefited from the IPSL Data and Computing Center ESPRI which is supported by CNRS, SU, CNES and Ecole Polytechnique. 

## References 

Addison, H., Kendon, E. J., Ravuri, S., Aitchison, L., & Watson, P. A. G. (2026). Machine Learning Emulation of Precipitation From km-Scale UK Regional Cli-mate Simulations Using a Diffusion Model. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems , 18 (3), e2025MS005140. doi: 10.1029/2025MS005140 Aich, M., Hess, P., Pan, B., Bathiany, S., Huang, Y., & Boers, N. (2024). Con-ditional diffusion models for downscaling and bias correction of Earth sys-tem model precipitation. arXiv. (Version Number: 2) doi: 10.48550/ ARXIV.2404.14416 Aithal, S., Kolter, J., Lipton, Z., & Maini, P. (2024). Understanding Hallucina-tions in Diffusion Models through Mode Interpolation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (pp. 134614–134644). Vancouver, BC, Canada: Neural Information Processing Systems Foundation, Inc. (NeurIPS). doi: 10.52202/079017-4278 Albergo, M. S., & Vanden-Eijnden, E. (2023, March). Building Normalizing Flows with Stochastic Interpolants. arXiv. (arXiv:2209.15571 [cs.LG]) doi: 10.48550/ arXiv.2209.15571 Babaousmail, H., Hou, R., Gnitou, G. T., & Ayugi, B. (2021, July). Novel sta-tistical downscaling emulator for precipitation projections using deep Con-volutional Autoencoder over Northern Africa. Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics , 218 , 105614. doi: 10.1016/j.jastp.2021.105614 Bano-Medina, J., Iturbide, M., Fernandez, J., & Gutierrez, J. M. (2023, Novem-ber). Transferability and explainability of deep learning emulators for regional climate model projections: Perspectives for future applications. arXiv. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2311.03378 Bassetti, S., Hutchinson, B., Tebaldi, C., & Kravitz, B. (2024). DiffESM: Condi-tional Emulation of Temperature and Precipitation in Earth System Models With 3D Diffusion Models. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems ,

16 (10), e2023MS004194. doi: 10.1029/2023MS004194 Bayram, M., Partal, T., & Orucova Buyukoz, G. (2018, January). Numerical meth-ods for simulation of stochastic differential equations. Advances in Difference Equations , 2018 (1), 17. doi: 10.1186/s13662-018-1466-5 Ba˜ no-Medina, J., Manzanas, R., Cimadevilla, E., Fern´ andez, J., Gonz´ alez-Abad, J., Cofi˜ no, A. S., & Guti´ errez, J. M. (2022, September). Downscaling multi-model climate projection ensembles with deep learning (DeepESD): contribution to CORDEX EUR-44. Geoscientific Model Development , 15 (17), 6747–6758. doi: 10.5194/gmd-15-6747-2022 Ba˜ no-Medina, J., Manzanas, R., & Guti´ errez, J. M. (2020, April). Configu-ration and intercomparison of deep learning neural models for statistical downscaling. Geoscientific Model Development , 13 (4), 2109–2124. doi: 10.5194/gmd-13-2109-2020 Bo´ e, J., Mass, A., & Deman, J. (2023, July). A simple hybrid statistical–dynamical downscaling method for emulating regional climate models over Western Eu-rope. Evaluation, application, and role of added value? Climate Dynamics ,

61 (1), 271–294. doi: 10.1007/s00382-022-06552-2  

> –16– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

Cannon, A. J. (2008, December). Probabilistic Multisite Precipitation Downscaling by an Expanded Bernoulli–Gamma Density Network. doi: 10.1175/2008JHM960.1 Carreau, J., & Vrac, M. (2011, October). Stochastic downscaling of precipitation with neural network conditional mixture models. Water Resources Research ,

47 (10), 2010WR010128. doi: 10.1029/2010WR010128 Chadwick, R., Coppola, E., & Giorgi, F. (2011, December). An artificial neural net-work technique for downscaling GCM outputs to RCM spatial scale. Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics , 18 (6), 1013–1028. doi: 10.5194/npg-18-1013-2011 Clarke, B., Otto, F., Stuart-Smith, R., & Harrington, L. (2022, June). Extreme weather impacts of climate change: an attribution perspective. Environmental Research: Climate , 1 (1), 012001. doi: 10.1088/2752-5295/ac6e7d Coppola, E., Nogherotto, R., Ciarlo’, J. M., Giorgi, F., van Meijgaard, E., Kady-grov, N., . . . Wulfmeyer, V. (2021). Assessment of the European Climate Projections as Simulated by the Large EURO-CORDEX Regional and Global Climate Model Ensemble. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres ,

126 (4), e2019JD032356. doi: 10.1029/2019JD032356 Doury, A., Somot, S., & Gadat, S. (2024, September). On the suitability of a convolutional neural network based RCM-emulator for fine spatio-temporal precipitation. Climate Dynamics , 62 (9), 8587–8613. doi: 10.1007/s00382-024-07350-8 Doury, A., Somot, S., Gadat, S., Ribes, A., & Corre, L. (2023, March). Regional climate model emulator based on deep learning: concept and first evaluation of a novel hybrid downscaling approach. Climate Dynamics , 60 (5), 1751–1779. doi: 10.1007/s00382-022-06343-9 Gneiting, T., & Raftery, A. E. (2007, March). Strictly Proper Scoring Rules, Pre-diction, and Estimation. Journal of the American Statistical Association ,

102 (477), 359–378. doi: 10.1198/016214506000001437 Harris, D., Foufoula-Georgiou, E., Droegemeier, K. K., & Levit, J. J. (2001, August). Multiscale Statistical Properties of a High-Resolution Pre-cipitation Forecast. Journal of Hydrometeorology , 2 (4), 406–418. doi: 10.1175/1525-7541(2001)002 ⟨0406:MSPOAH ⟩2.0.CO;2 Hess, P., Aich, M., Pan, B., & Boers, N. (2024). Fast, Scale-Adaptive, and Uncertainty-Aware Downscaling of Earth System Model Fields with Genera-tive Machine Learning. arXiv. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2403.02774 Ho, J., Jain, A., & Abbeel, P. (2020). Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (Vol. 33, pp. 6840–6851). Curran Associates, Inc. Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2015). Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In Y. Bengio & Y. LeCun (Eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings. 

Legasa, M. N., Casanueva, A., & Manzanas, R. (2026). Strengths and Limitations of Statistical and Dynamical Downscaling for the Representation of Compound Dry and Hot Events Over Spain. International Journal of Climatology , 46 (2), e70183. doi: 10.1002/joc.70183 Legasa, M. N., Manzanas, R., Calvi˜ no, A., & Guti´ errez, J. M. (2022). A Posteriori Random Forests for Stochastic Downscaling of Precipitation by Predicting Probability Distributions. Water Resources Research , 58 (4), e2021WR030272. doi: 10.1029/2021WR030272 Legasa, M. N., Thao, S., Vrac, M., & Manzanas, R. (2023). Assessing Three Perfect Prognosis Methods for Statistical Downscaling of Climate Change Precipita-tion Scenarios. Geophysical Research Letters , 50 (9), e2022GL102525. doi: 10.1029/2022GL102525  

> –17– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

Lipman, Y., Chen, R. T. Q., Ben-Hamu, H., Nickel, M., & Le, M. (2023, February). 

Flow Matching for Generative Modeling. arXiv. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2210 .02747 Maraun, D., Wetterhall, F., Ireson, A. M., Chandler, R. E., Kendon, E. J., Wid-mann, M., . . . Thiele-Eich, I. (2010, September). Precipitation downscaling under climate change: Recent developments to bridge the gap between dynam-ical models and the end user. Reviews of Geophysics , 48 (3), RG3003. doi: 10.1029/2009RG000314 Mardani, M., Brenowitz, N., Cohen, Y., Pathak, J., Chen, C.-Y., Liu, C.-C., . . . Pritchard, M. (2025, February). Residual corrective diffusion modeling for km-scale atmospheric downscaling. Communications Earth & Environment ,

6 (1), 124. doi: 10.1038/s43247-025-02042-5 Nabat, P., Somot, S., Cassou, C., Mallet, M., Michou, M., Bouniol, D., . . . Saint-Martin, D. (2020, July). Modulation of radiative aerosols effects by atmo-spheric circulation over the Euro-Mediterranean region. Atmospheric Chem-istry and Physics , 20 (14), 8315–8349. doi: 10.5194/acp-20-8315-2020 Nichol, A. Q., & Dhariwal, P. (2021, July). Improved Denoising Diffusion Prob-abilistic Models. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Ma-chine Learning (pp. 8162–8171). PMLR. Rampal, N., Gibson, P. B., Sherwood, S., & Abramowitz, G. (2024). On the Ex-trapolation of Generative Adversarial Networks for downscaling precipitation extremes in warmer climates. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2409.13934 Rampal, N., Gibson, P. B., Sherwood, S. C., Queen, L. E., Lewis, H., & Abramowitz, G. (2025). Downscaling with AI reveals the large role of in-ternal variability in fine-scale projections of climate extremes. arXiv. (Version Number: 1) doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2507.06527 Rampal, N., Gibson, P. B., Sood, A., Stuart, S., Fauchereau, N. C., Brandolino, C., . . . Meyers, T. (2022, December). High-resolution downscaling with inter-pretable deep learning: Rainfall extremes over New Zealand. Weather and Climate Extremes , 38 , 100525. doi: 10.1016/j.wace.2022.100525 Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., & Brox, T. (2015). U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation. In N. Navab, J. Hornegger, W. M. Wells, & A. F. Frangi (Eds.), Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted In-tervention – MICCAI 2015 (pp. 234–241). Cham: Springer International Publishing. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-24574-4 28 Schillinger, M., Samarin, M., Shen, X., Knutti, R., & Meinshausen, N. (2025). En-Scale: Temporally-consistent multivariate generative downscaling via proper scoring rules. arXiv. (Version Number: 3) doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2509.26258 Sinclair, S., & Pegram, G. G. S. (2005, July). Empirical Mode Decomposition in 2-D space and time: a tool for space-time rainfall analysis and nowcasting. Hydrol-ogy and Earth System Sciences , 9 (3), 127–137. doi: 10.5194/hess-9-127-2005 Soares, P. M. M., Johannsen, F., Lima, D. C. A., Lemos, G., Bento, V. A., & Bushenkova, A. (2024, January). High-resolution downscaling of CMIP6 Earth system and global climate models using deep learning for Iberia. Geoscientific Model Development , 17 (1), 229–259. doi: 10.5194/gmd-17-229-2024 Song, Y., Sohl-Dickstein, J., Kingma, D. P., Kumar, A., Ermon, S., & Poole, B. (2021, February). Score-Based Generative Modeling through Stochastic Differ-ential Equations.. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2011.13456 Tomasi, E., Franch, G., & Cristoforetti, M. (2025, April). Can AI be enabled to perform dynamical downscaling? A latent diffusion model to mimic kilometer-scale COSMO5.0 clm9 simulations. Geoscientific Model Development , 18 (6), 2051–2078. doi: 10.5194/gmd-18-2051-2025 Vandal, T., Kodra, E., Ganguly, S., Michaelis, A., Nemani, R., & Ganguly, A. R. (2017, August). DeepSD: Generating High Resolution Climate Change Projec- 

> –18– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)

tions through Single Image Super-Resolution. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 

(pp. 1663–1672). Halifax NS Canada: ACM. doi: 10.1145/3097983.3098004 van der Meer, M., de Roda Husman, S., & Lhermitte, S. (2023). Deep Learning Regional Climate Model Emulators: A Comparison of Two Downscaling Train-ing Frameworks. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems , 15 (6), e2022MS003593. doi: 10.1029/2022MS003593 Vaughan, A., Tebbutt, W., Hosking, J. S., & Turner, R. E. (2021). Convolutional conditional neural processes for local climate downscaling. arXiv. (Version Number: 1) doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2101.07950 Vrac, M., & Naveau, P. (2007, July). Stochastic downscaling of precipitation: From dry events to heavy rainfalls. Water Resources Research , 43 (7), 2006WR005308. doi: 10.1029/2006WR005308 Wang, J., Liu, Z., Foster, I., Chang, W., Kettimuthu, R., & Kotamarthi, R. (2021). 

Fast and accurate learned multiresolution dynamical downscaling for precipita-tion. arXiv. (Version Number: 1) doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2101.06813 Wernli, H., Hofmann, C., & Zimmer, M. (2009, December). Spatial Forecast Veri-fication Methods Intercomparison Project: Application of the SAL Technique. 

Weather and Forecasting , 24 (6), 1472–1484. doi: 10.1175/2009WAF2222271.1 Wernli, H., Paulat, M., Hagen, M., & Frei, C. (2008, November). SAL—A Novel Quality Measure for the Verification of Quantitative Precipitation Forecasts. 

Monthly Weather Review , 136 (11), 4470–4487. doi: 10.1175/2008MWR2415.1 

> –19–

manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES) 

Figure 1. Each panel shows a target selected for the in-depth analysis performed in Sec-tion 3.2 (see Table 3). For each panel, the first row shows the reference precipitation field, as predicted by Asym, and as predicted (expected value) by B-Gamma. The second row shows 4 simulations for each generative model (B-Gamma, CPMGEM, ParamDiffusion). The 4 simula-tions correspond to, respectively and clockwise: the target with the lowest rainfall amount, the target with the highest rainfall amount, the target closest to the reference (in terms of gridpoint mean absolute error) and the target farthest. –20– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES) 

Figure 2. Prediction error as measured by the root mean squared error (RMSE), computed for the whole evaluation period, for the different models considered. In the case of the generative models, the value used for the computation is the expected value for each day, as the average of 50 simulations. –21– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES) 

Figure 3. Relative bias in the percentage of dry days (panel a) and mean rainfall over wet days (1mm, panel b) for the models considered (columns). The reference climatology is shown on the first column. For both metrics, results are show per gridpoint (top row, for each panel), and using a 3x3 moving average window (bottom) before computing the statistics, to account for the local spatial consistency. –22– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES) 

Figure 4. As Figure 3, for the standard deviation (panel a), Median (panel b) and 99th per-centile (panel c); for values over 1mm. –23– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES) 

Figure 5. Comparison of the spatial distributions (for the whole domain), using quantile-quantile plots. Panel (a) shows the percentage of wet days and panel (b) shows the average rainfall over 1mm for the whole domain. Panel (c) shows the average rainfall for days between percentiles 90 to 99.9. Only the 2 diffusion models are shown in this panel. –24– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES) 

Figure 6. Radially averaged power spectral density (RAPSD) for the models considered in this study for the deterministic model (Asym, teal) and simulations from B-Gamma, yellow; CPMGEM, dark blue; and ParamDiffusion, red. The RAPSD for the reference RCM-simulated precipitation fields is shown as a dashed black line. –25– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES) 

Figure 7. For each selected target day (rows), out-of-envelope error for each model (columns, error for Asym), with a prior 3x3 moving window. For 1000 simulations, out-of-envelope error is computed as the positive/negative difference between the maximum/minimum value generated by the generative model vs the observation (purple/brown); and is 0 (white) if the observed value lies within the simulated distribution limits. –26– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES) 

Figure 8. For the selected target reference RCM-simulated precipitation fields (rows, see Ta-ble 3), continuous rank probability scores (CRPS) for the models considered (columns), with a previous 3x3 moving average window. Note that, for the deterministic model (Asym) this corre-sponds to the mean absolute error. –27– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES) 

Figure 9. SAL diagrams for 1000 simulations (dots) for each target (rows), the deterministic prediction made by Asym (star), CPMGEM (first column) and ParamDiffusion (second column). Note that the y-axis has been capped at [ −1, 1] since there is no point outside this range. –28– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES) 

> Name  Description  Parameters  Type  Training Time  Simulation Time
> Asym  U-Net with loss function to capture the tail.  389 471  Deterministic  6 h  < 10 s B-Gamma  U-Net with gridpoint-based parametric output  389 533  Parametric  6 h  < 1 m ParamDiffusion  Diffusion on B-Gamma output.  ∼ 0.4 + 15.7 M  Generative  6 + 14 h  16 h CPMGEM  Diffusion on the large-scale predictors.  ∼ 63 M  Generative  63 h  48 h
> Table 1.  The different methodologies assessed in this article. Note the number of parameters of the ParamDiffusion model is shown as a sum for the background model + the diffusion backbone (the diffusion backbone has 15 724 929 parameters). A summary of computational costs is provided in the last two columns. For the four models, the times are reported for the same GPU model: a  Nvidia Tesla V100-SXM2-16GB  (both training and simulating). Simulation time corresponds to the total time required to produce one simulation (prediction in the case of Asym) for the whole test period considered in this study (RCP4.5, 2005-2100). Num-bers are rounded to the nearest unit. Training times for ParamDiffusion are shown as a sum (background + diffusion backbone).

–29– manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)