Title: 22060_When_and_how_can_inexact.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=QBjuYL4gAX

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# When and how can inexact generative models still sample from the data manifold? 

Nisha Chandramoorthy 

Department of Statistics Committee on Computational and Applied Mathematics The University of Chicago Chicago, IL 60637 

nishac@uchicago.edu 

Adriaan de Clercq 

Department of Statistics Committee on Computational and Applied Mathematics The University of Chicago Chicago, IL 60637 

# Abstract 

A curious phenomenon observed in some dynamical generative models is the following: despite learning errors in the score function or the drift vector field, the generated samples appear to shift along the support of the data distribution but not away from it. In this work, we investigate this phenomenon of robust-ness of the support by taking a dynamical systems approach on the generating stochastic/deterministic process. Our perturbation analysis of the probability flow reveals that infinitesimal learning errors cause the predicted density to be different from the target density only on the data manifold for a wide class of generative models. Further, what is the dynamical mechanism that leads to the robustness of the support? We show that the alignment of the top Lyapunov vectors (most sensitive infinitesimal perturbation directions) with the tangent spaces along the boundary of the data manifold leads to robustness and prove a sufficient condition on the dynamics of the generating process to achieve this alignment. Moreover, the alignment condition is efficient to compute and, in practice, for robust generative models, automatically leads to accurate estimates of the tangent bundle of the data manifold. Using a finite-time linear perturbation analysis on samples paths as well as probability flows, our work complements and extends existing works on obtaining theoretical guarantees for generative models from a stochastic analysis, statistical learning and uncertainty quantification points of view. Our results apply across different dynamical generative models, such as conditional flow-matching and score-based generative models, and for different target distributions that may or may not satisfy the manifold hypothesis. 

# 1 Introduction 

Given samples from a target distribution, a generative model (GM) outputs more samples (approxi-mately) from the target. Most generative models accomplish this task using a dynamical formulation of probabilistic measure transport. They solve an optimization problem for a vector field or a drift 

term of a deterministic or stochastic process that produces the desired target samples in finite time. Flows under the learned vector field transports probability densities between some source density 

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). Figure 1: Robustness of the support under perturbations of SGMs. Columns 1 and 2: score vector field (lines) and the density (contours) near the start time and toward the end respectively. Notice that the score field is nearly orthogonal to the target support. Column 3: generated target density. Column 4: Leading finite-time Lyapunov vectors at the end, which are noticeably aligned with the target support. Column 5: kernel density estimate of the distribution generated by a process corrupted by large errors in the score. The density is shifted primarily tangent to the data manifold. and the target. For instance, in diffusion models or score-based generative models (SGMs) and their variants [ 52 , 51 , 11 ], the vector field corresponds to a score of a noising process (e.g., an Orstein-Uhlenbeck process starting initialized with the given target samples) and the source density is that achieved at the end of the noising process. On the other hand, in conditional flow matching variants [ 37 , 56 , 57 , 55 ], stochastic interpolants and Schrödinger bridge-based variants [ 18 , 3 , 2 ] and using Neural ODEs [ 61 , 14 ], the learned vector field is constructed by specifying a path (e.g., straight line path or optimal transport paths) on sample space, between samples according to a fixed source density and the given target samples. In every case, there are inevitably errors incurred in learning the vector field as a neural network for multiple reasons, including optimization errors, approximation errors, discretization errors during time integration (of the underlying deterministic or stochastic process) and finite sample errors. These errors will propagate through the generating process and therefore be reflected in the predicted target samples. However, when are the predicted target samples close to high density regions of the target? How can we formalize this error propagation? Further, how can we determine the robustness of a given GM to these errors in the vector field? In this work, we provide answers to these questions by taking a dynamical systems approach to GMs. Even as the use of GMs proliferates (see e.g., [ 60 ] for a review), their utility in critical applications, e.g., in climate predictions [ 40 ] especially hinges on theoretical guarantees for their practical implementations. Significant research progress has been achieved in obtaining convergence guarantees (see e.g., [ 17 , 34 ]; section 5) for SGM-variants under minimal assumptions on the target as learning errors in the score vanish. But rather than convergence to the distribution, a property that may be more pertinent to practical applications across engineering and data science is the robustness of support , which is the subject of this work. In other words, since learning errors are inevitable, a characterization of when a generative model will still be able to capture the high-density regions, or produce physically relevant or plausible samples, would be enormously useful. Our definition of robustness is motivated by many empirical and theoretical studies on the feature learning and generalization of SGMs under the manifold hypothesis [ 47 , 13 ]. Figure 1 depicts these observations for a two-dimensional two-moons target density (supported almost on a 1D curve), generated by an SGM using analytical scores, shown in the third column. When at each step of the generating process, we make a deterministic error in the score estimation, we observe that the generated distribution shifts along the support, as illustrated in Figure 1 (rightmost column). Surprisingly, the errors in the score estimation, even when large, do not cause the generated samples to move to zero probability regions of the target, which are off the moons for the target shown in Figure 1. A natural question that arises is when such a robustness of the support may be expected. To answer this question, we formally analyze this behavior of the time-inhomogeneous Markov chain that generates the samples as a random dynamical system. As a byproduct of our analysis, we characterize precisely how geometric information about the support is extracted by robust generative models. Our main contributions are as follows: 

Robustness of support. Under mild regularity assumptions on the generating dynamics, we show that an infinitesimal change in the predicted target is only supported where the target density is supported as the perturbation size tends to 0. This explains our observed robustness of support even in high-dimensional data distributions (see Appendix G.4 for response to score perturbations on the CIFAR10 distribution). 2Alignment. When the leading finite-time Lyapunov vectors (LVs; see section 4 for precise definitions), which represent the principal directions of deformation of the sample space at the final time, have a negligible component normal to the target support, we show that the generating process learns the support. This is evident in Figure 1(column 4), where the leading LVs (shown as black lines) are tangent to the support, and robustness of the support holds. 

Dynamical mechanism for alignment. We prove sufficient conditions that characterize when the generating dynamics has LVs that align with the support of the data distribution. One sufficient condition, intuitively, turns out to be that the vector field acts as an attracting force to the support, which is satisfied for the SGM dynamics in Figure 1 (columns 1 and 2). 

Practical implications. Note that there are many efficient, numerically stable algorithms, which can be implemented with automatic differentiation, to compute these finite-time Lyapunov vectors. Thus, we can efficiently obtain the tangent spaces to the data manifold using any aligned GM. Finally, we show that if a GM has the alignment property, so does the same GM under learning errors. Since our analyses do not assume a specific dynamics, our results apply to all practical implementations (e.g., using predictor-corrector integration or ODE integration) and across different dynamical generative models (e.g., SGMs or conditional flow matching). 

# 2 Preliminaries: generative models as random dynamical systems 

Let pdata be the data (target) distribution with a compact support M ⊂ RD . The distribution pdata is singular under the manifold hypothesis, i.e., dim( M ) = d < D. Let ρ0 be a given source probability density in RD . Fixing ρ0 and a density that approximates pdata , there can be infinitely many couplings 

between them. That is, for many sequences of functions {Ft}0≤t≤τ , sample paths Xt = Ft(Xt−1)

can have the same starting and ending distributions, i.e., X0 ∼ ρ0 and Xτ ∼ pdata . What enables a given sequence {Ft} to have the robustness of support property? To study this question, we treat the sequence Ft as a (random) dynamical system. In score generative models or diffusion models [ 52 ], the dynamics, Ft, on path space is the stochastic reverse process. At each time t = 0 , 1, · · · , τ − 1, the map F Ξ 

> t

on sample space represents the dynamics under an instance of the noise path, denoted by Ξ. This noise path is a sequence Ξ = 

{ξ0, · · · , ξ τ −1} of independent Gaussian random variables, which must be viewed as a (scaled) time discretization of a Brownian motion. Since, with a known score, a deterministic, time-dependent process (time-integrated solution of a probability flow ODE) can effect the same dynamics on probability space, for simplicity, we consider deterministic, non-autonomous maps Ft throughout. However, note that the perturbation analysis both on probability space and tangent space in the remainder of this paper applies pathwise (for each Ξ) (see [ 5, 29 ] for a rigorous treatment of Lyapunov vectors and exponents for random dynamical systems), even if we consider Ft as a stochastic process. In a dynamical formulation of a GM, Ft is typically partially represented by a neural network. In general, Ft(x) = x + δt v t(x), where the drift vector field vt (a neural network) is learned using samples from pdata and δt is a small timestep. For instance, in a score-based generative model based on an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noising (forward) process, Ft, the dynamical system representing the reverse process can be written as vt(x) = θ x + σ2st(x), t ≤ τ, where the score functions of the OU process , s t = ∇ log ρt, are represented using a neural network. With no learning errors, we may write that F τ♯ ρ0 = ρτ , where the pushforward notation ( ♯) for probability densities means the following: T♯ρ = π implies that if x ∼ ρ, T (x) ∼ π. Explicitly, the pushforward operator is a linear operator on densities, and in the context of dynamical systems, called the Frobenius-Perron or the transfer operator: Ltρ := ρ ◦ F −1 

> t

/|det dF t| ◦ F −1 

> t

, assuming that Ft ∈ C 1(RD ). We use exponential notation, F τ +1 := Fτ ◦ F τ , with F 0 = Id , to denote τ iterations of the process. 

Tangent space. From here on, we will be considering the evolution of infinitesimal perturbations along sample paths of Ft. These will represent small learning errors that will perturb the evolution of sample paths. Roughly speaking, at each point x ∈ RD , the directions of infinitesimal perturbation are also in RD . More precisely, at each point x, we have a tangent space (isomorphic to RD ) denoted by TxRD that represents all possible infinitesimal perturbations or tangent vectors at x. A vector field, say v : RD → T RD , is a function that maps a base point x ∈ RD to a tangent vector v(x) in 

TxRD . We refer the reader to Appendix C for further background on tangent spaces. 33 Why GMs sample along the support even under learning errors 

In this section alone, we assume that pdata is absolutely continuous (i.e., d = D) and its density is 

ρτ : i.e., the generative model F τ is exact/convergent (ignoring errors on O(δt )). Consider now the perturbed dynamical system, Ft,ϵ (x) = x + δt v t(x) + ϵ χ t(x), where the vector field χt represents a time-dependent perturbation, and the original model Ft is recovered with ϵ = 0 . It is important to note that tangent perturbation does not mean perturbation along the tangent space TxM, but rather just a perturbation (a tangent vector) in TxRD . In other words, the perturbation χt(x) at an x can be in any direction in RD .

Perturbations to the dynamics here are models for statistical errors in the learned drift, vt. That is, we define a parameterized family of maps ϵ → Ft,ϵ at each time t, with F tϵ = Ft−1,ϵ ◦ F t−1 

> ϵ

. The corresponding dynamics on probability densities is given by ρt,ϵ = Lt,ϵ ρt−1,ϵ , with the corresponding Frobenius-Perron/transfer operator, Lt,ϵ . We omit the subscript ϵ to refer to the unperturbed system, 

ϵ = 0 . For instance, Lt,ϵ and Lt are respectively the Frobenius-Perron operator at time t of the perturbed and unperturbed systems. Using exponential notation for Lt,ϵ as well, fixing the source density ρ0 we write the perturbed density, ρτ,ϵ = Lτϵ ρ0.

Recall that for a vector field u, and a differentiable scalar function f, its directional derivative is given by the scalar field defined as u(f )( x) := lim ϵ→0(f (x + ϵu (x)) − f (x)) /ϵ. Now let u be a vector field such that the directional derivative of ρτ with respect to u, denoted by u(ρτ ), is the perturbation in the predicted density due to the ϵ perturbation of the dynamics. That is, let the vector field u be such that u(ρτ ) = ∂ϵ|ϵ=0 Lτϵ ρ0. Intuitively, the derivative ∂ϵ|ϵ=0 Lτϵ gives the statistical response after time τ of the dynamics {F tϵ }. We refer to u as the target response field, since it is a vector field that measures the direction and magnitude of the perturbation to the target density. We now understand the target response field, u, through explicit expressions for the statistical response operator, ∂ϵ|ϵ=0 Lτϵ .

For a given test function f : M → R, Ex∼ρτ f (x) := ⟨f, ρ τ ⟩ = ⟨f, Lτ ρ0⟩ = ⟨f ◦ F τ , ρ 0⟩,

from a change-of-variables in the integration (one can view this as a conservation principle for probability mass). Here, ⟨· , ·⟩ refers to an L2 inner product with respect to Lebesgue measure on RD . Now for any observable f, we define its time-dependent response, rt(f ), to be a scalar field that denotes the change in its value along a path due to the perturbation to the dynamics. More precisely, let rt(f ) := lim ϵ→0(1 /ϵ ) ( f ◦ F tϵ − f ◦ F t) , so that, by taking adjoints, we have 

⟨f, ∂ ϵ|ϵ=0 Lτϵ ρ0⟩ = ⟨f, u (ρτ )⟩ = ⟨rτ (f ), ρ 0⟩. Now, using the definition of rt(f ), for any f and t, we can derive the following recursive relationship, 

rt(f ) = lim 

> ϵ→0

1

ϵ

  f ◦ F tϵ − f ◦ Ft−1,ϵ ◦ F t−1 +  f ◦ Ft−1,ϵ ◦ F t−1 − f ◦ F t 

= rt−1(f ◦ Ft−1) + ( ∇f ◦ Ft−1 · χt−1) ◦ F t−1. (1) Here, we have used the definition of the perturbation vector field χt at time t by χt(x) := lim ϵ→0(1 /ϵ )( Ft,ϵ (x) − Ft(x)) , which isolates the error made due to the perturbation to the dynamics at time t. Since both F 0 and F 0 

> ϵ

are the identity, we have r0(f ) to be the zero function for all f. Apply-ing the recursive relationship (1) , we obtain rt(f ) = Pt−1 

> i=0

(∇(f ◦ Ft−1 ◦ · · · ◦ Fi+1 ) ◦ Fi · χi)◦F i.

Substituting this explicit expression for the response of f, we obtain the following expression for the statistical response, ⟨f, ∂ ϵ|ϵ=0 Lτ ρ0⟩ = ⟨f, u (ρτ )⟩ = ⟨rτ (f ), ρ 0⟩ = Pτ −1 

> i=0

⟨∇ (f ◦ FT −1 ◦ · · · ◦ 

Fi+1 ) ◦ F i+1 · χi ◦ F i, ρ 0⟩. Upon integration by parts and change of variables, we obtain for test functions f that vanish on the boundary ∂M, u(ρτ )( x) = −ρτ (x) 

> τ−1

X

> i=0

(div( χi) + χi · si) ◦ F −1 

> i

◦ · · · ◦ F −1 

> τ−1

(x). (2) The above expression indicates that the statistical response is the product of the target density, ρτ ,

with a scalar field. In other words, when pdata is non-singular and Ft is continously differentiable on 

RD , we obtain that the statistical response is supported only where the target density is non-zero, in the limit ϵ → 0. See Appendix B for an extension of the above computation to stochastic processes and singular pdata .

4Figure 2: The finite-time Lyapunov vectors shown in green at two samples of the predicted distribution. The sample path of a diffusion model starting at the red dot is shown in blue. The leading backward Lyapunov vector (BLV), shown in a darker green, shows alignment with the data manifold. See Appendix G.2 for more details on this two-dimensional example. 

# 4 A dynamical mechanism for robustness 

In the previous section, we looked at statistical response to learning errors for non-singular targets. Here, we propose a mechanism for the robustness of the statistical response by looking at infinitesimal perturbations along sample paths (dynamics on the tangent bundle) for both singular and non-singular target distributions. To do this, we carry out a pathwise analysis that elucidates how learning errors propagate when we apply the dynamics. This is an adaptation of linear perturbation theory from dynamical systems theory (see [ 28 ] for a textbook exposition), and we illustrate the required concepts below. Fixing a sample path, we deduce sufficient conditions on the stability of the sample path that is consistent with the robustness of support. To this end, we must define a notion of sample path stability. We say that a path initialized with x0 ∼ ρ0 is robustness-consistent if at its end point, xτ ,

the directions of accumulated infinitesimal perturbations point along the data manifold and not away from it. To explain the reasoning behind this notion and define it more precisely, we provide a brief primer on tangent dynamics. 

Dynamics on tangent space. Fix a sample path xt = Ft(xt−1). Now, consider applying an infinitesimal perturbation (similar to in section 3) at time 0. Then, after one step, F 1 

> ϵ

(x0) = F 1(x0) + 

ϵdF 0(x0) χ0(x0) + O(ϵ2). Hence, after one step, in the limit ϵ → 0, we have (F 1 

> ϵ

(x0) − x1)/ϵ =

dF 0(x0) χ0(x0) =: χ1(x1), which we may define as a new vector field χ1 evaluated at the point 

x1 (a tangent vector at x1). Iterating this definition, we can define a linear dynamical system, 

dF t = dF t−1 ◦ F t−1 · · · dF 0 that acts on the tangent bundle and evolves an infinitesimal perturbation along a vector field applied at time 0 to the corresponding vector field at time t. Considering these linear evolutions, we can define the principal directions of deformation (the most sensitive directions of perturbation) by considering the leading eigenvectors of (dF t)( dF t⊤), which we will call the finite-time Lyapunov vectors. The eigenvalues are generally arranged in decreasing order, with at least one positive eigenvalue indicating expanding directions or diverging infinitesimal perturbations. The time-asymptotic properties of these matrix are well-studied via the classical Furstenberg and Oseledets ergodic theorems (see [ 5] for a textbook exposition). However, we are only concerned with finite-time dynamics here, since GMs considered here are only defined for 0 ≤ t ≤ τ. 

By definition, the least stable Lyapunov subspace is aligned with the most sensitive directions of (infinitesimal) perturbations in the dynamics. In Figure 2, we illustrate the two Lyapunov vectors (two one-dimensional Lyapunov subspaces) computed along a two-dimensional sample path (in blue). Here the data manifold (the support of the data distribution) is a one-dimensional curve shown in red. For more details on this experiment, including pdata , which is singular here, we refer the reader to Appendix G.2. The leading/least stable Lyapunov vector is shown in green, and interestingly, it appears tangent to the data manifold. Intuitively, this means that the direction where most errors will result along the sample path is aligned with the data manifold. In other words, the direction of the most stable Lyapunov vector, where any error made along the sample path decays quickest, is away from the data manifold. This means that the sample path is attracted to the data manifold, even under (small) errors. We formalize this intuition in the proposition below for convergent generative models [34]. 5For now, assume that the support of pdata is a compact d-dimensional subset of RD , which d < D. 

On the boundary of the support of the data (target) distribution, intuitively, the score is orthogonal to the support. This is because pdata is zero outside of the data manifold, and non-zero on it; thus the gradient log or score points in the direction of this sharp change in pdata . We will define robustness-consistency as the condition where the least stable d-dimensional Lyapunov subspace is orthogonal to the score. When the target score has a small (or zero) component along the least stable Lyapunov subspace, this means that the tangent directions most sensitive to perturbations are along the data manifold (as in the example in Figure 2). In this section, we give sufficient conditions for the robustness-consistency of sample paths. We will show how this improves our qualitative understanding of why some generative models are robust. Moreover, we will provide a computable criterion for verifying the robustness of a given generative model. Before this, we first describe the most sensitive subspaces or constructive approximations of the least stable Lyapunov subspaces of the tangent spaces associated with sample paths. 

Most sensitive subspaces. Let {xt} be a fixed sample path (trajectory) of the generative model F τ .

When we have an exact generative model, if x0 ∼ ρ0, then xτ ∼ pdata . Recall that the set M ∈ RD

is the support of pdata , and the effective dimension of the support is d < = D. We define Ed 

> 0

to be a randomly chosen d dimensional subbundle (a D ×d orthogonal matrix at each x). We can consider the orthogonal decomposition of Tx0 M (which is isomorphic to RD ) to be Tx0 M = Ed 

> 0

(x0) ⊕ Ed⊥ 

> 0

(x0).

Now, the evolution of these subspaces under the time-dependent Jacobian matrix field, dF t, gives the tangent dynamics: dF t Edt = Edt+1 Rt. By construction, since Edt+1 (x) at each x is orthogonal, the above tangent equation is simply a QR decomposition of the D × d matrix dF t Edt . The diagonal elements of Rt represent stretching or contraction factors under the linearization dF t. We refer to Edt

constructed this way as the most sensitive subbundle because as t → ∞ , this converges to the top 

d-dimensional Oseledets subbundle (backward Lyapunov vector bundle). See Appendix A. 

Proposition 4.1. [Predicting the support with convergent and aligned generative models.] For any 

δ > 0, let ϵ0 > 0 be such that a convergent generative model (see Appendix D), F τ , produces n

samples, {yi}, i ∈ [n], such that with probability ≥ 1 − δ/ 2 over the generated samples, ∥T (yi) −

yi∥ ≤ ϵ0 and T (yi) ∼ pdata . Additionally, let F τ be such that the most sensitive d-dimensional subspace of the tangent space, Edτ (x), spans Tx∂M with probability ≥ 1−δ/ 2. Then, for some c > 0,

there exists a binary function f : RD → { +1 , −1} such that, Ex∼pdata 1f < 0(x) ≤ cn −1 log n +

n−1 log( n2/2δ), with probability ≥ 1 − δ. 

Proof. (Sketch) Given n predicted samples, yi, let xi = T (yi) ∼ pdata be samples from pdata 

obtained by applying the L2-optimal transport map. Let f (x) = sgn( w · Φ( x) + b) be a one-class kernel-based classifier trained on xi, i ∈ [n]. Then, f satisfies the margin-based generalization bounds (see e.g., Theorem 3 of [ 58 ]; [ 49 ]) in the statement of the proposition. By assumption, with probability 

≥ 1 − δ/ 2, we have, since the samples yi are of the form, yi = xi + ϵ0vi, where vi ∈ Tx∂M, the predictions f (yi) = f (xi) and therefore the confidence margin of f does not change . Taking union bound, we obtain the result, with c = O(1 /margin ). See Appendix D for an elaboration. The above lemma therefore says that the alignment with the data manifold of the least stable directions is crucial for robustness of the support, as defined in section 3. We formally define this alignment as follows. 

Definition 4.2. We say that a generative model F τ has the alignment property if, Edτ (x), the top 

d-dimensional Lyapunov subspace (spanned by the top d least stable Lyapunov vectors) is orthogonal to the target score, sτ (x), at each x ∈ ∂M, the boundary of the support of ρτ .

First, we provide some intuition for the definition of alignment. We claim that a robust predicted distribution (in the sense of robustness of the support) has a highly anisotropic score near the data manifold (the true support of the target). More precisely, for a robust distribution, the score components along the data manifold are smaller than the components normal to it. Thus, it is reasonable to conclude that when a robust distribution shows such an anisotropicity along Edτ ⊕ Ed⊥ 

> τ

,

the most sensitive directions Edτ are aligned with (the tangent bundle along) the data manifold. Before we state our main result, which provides a sufficient characterization of generative models that have the alignment property, we define anisotropic derivatives. 

Tangent and normal derivatives. We consider the orthogonal decomposition of the vector field (drift term) vt on the tangent bundle T RD = Edt ⊕ Ed⊥ 

> t

. That is, we write vt(x) = Edt (x)vt,d (x) + 

6Figure 3: Top row (Column 1): noise image from source distribution. (Column 2): an MNIST [19] digit generated by a score-based generative model. See Appendix G for training details. (Column 3): generated image corrupted by the most sensitive Lyapunov vector. See Appendix A for details on the computation of these vectors. (Column 4): generated image corrupted by the 100th most sensitive LV at the same noise level. This shows that moving along very stable LVs, for indices greater than the intrinsic dimension, results in leaving the data manifold. Bottom row: finite time Lyapunov exponents associated with the generating process in an SGM, with a small gap at an index close to the intrinsic dimension, signifying superstability off the data manifold. 

Ed⊥ 

> t

(x)vt,d ⊥(x), defining the components, vt,d (x) = Ed⊤ 

> t

(x)vt(x) ∈ Rd and vt,d ⊥(x) =

Ed⊥⊤  

> t

(x)vt(x) ∈ RD−d of the vector vt(x). Let ∇t,d indicate the differential “along the subspace 

Edt ,”, i.e., ∇t,d f (x) = [lim ϵ→0(f (x+ϵe 1

> t,d

(x)) −f (x)) /ϵ, · · · , lim ϵ→0(f (x+ϵe dt,d (x)) −f (x)) /ϵ ],

where eit,d (x) is the ith column of Edt . The differential, ∇t,d ⊥ is defined similarly as the directional derivatives along the subspace Ed⊥ 

> t

. Finally, we also define the contraction factors αt := ∥Rt∥∞

and βt := ∥dF t Ed⊥ 

> t

∥∞, where the ∞ norm over the scalar field is the supremum over x ∈ M. By definition, 1 ≥ αt ≥ βt, at all t. 

Theorem 4.3. [Alignment of generative models.] Let M ⊂ RD be the compact set where the target distribution pdata is supported. When the support M of the target is a d-dimensional manifold with d ≤ D, for an exact generative model that is compressive, the alignment property holds under the following conditions: for some δ ∈ (0 , 1) , there exists a time t∗ ∈ [0 , τ ] such that i) Q 

> t≤n≤τ

αn ≥ (1 + δ)τ −t, t ≥ t∗; ii) ∥(Id + δt ∇t,d vt,d )−1∇2

> t,d

vt,d ∥∞ ≤ δ1/(t−τ ), for all 

t ∈ [t∗, τ ]; and, iii) the cross derivatives ∥∇ t,d ⊥vt,d ∥, ∥∇ t,d vt,d ⊥∥ ≈ 0, for t ∈ [t∗, τ ]. Intuitively this means that the generating dynamics may include an expansive phase and the vector field vt is a uniform “attracting force” at the end. Proof. Recall the covariance of Edt in the sense that dF tEdt = Edt+1 Rt, where Rt is an upper triangular matrix in d dimensions. At each time t, for some δt > 0, we choose local coordinates on a δt-neighborhood of xt such that xt maps to 0 in RD and Edt maps to the standard basis of Rd

under the differential. If M is a smooth embedding in RD , we may define derivatives of all orders of these local coordinates. We now analyze the behavior of the Jacobian dF t and the score vector field, st in the two distinct phases of the dynamics: for t < t ∗ and at the end, when t > t ∗. In local coordinates, we have, dF t(x) = 

Id + δt ∇t,d vt,d (x) δt ∇t,d ⊥vt,d (x)

δt ∇t,d vt,d ⊥(x) Id + δt ∇t,d ⊥vt,d ⊥(x)



. Now, to analyze the behavior of the scores, st, consider the change of variables formula for probability densities. Differentiating after taking the logarithm of the change of variables for probability densities, we have that st+1 (xt+1 ) = st(xt)( dF t(xt)) −1 − tr( dF t(xt)−1d2Ft(xt))( dF t(xt)) −1. We now define 7the evolution of the score components along Etd : Using the covariance of Edt , we get, 

(st+1 Edt+1 ) ◦ Ft = st Edt R−1 

> t

− tr(( dF −1 

> t

d2Ft) Edt R−1 

> t

. (3) Since Ed is covariant, we may interpret (3) as an operator acting on score component functions, 

st+1 Edt+1 , (d-dimensional row vectors at each x) at each time, 

Gt(p) ◦ Ft = p R −1 

> t

− wt Edt R−1 

> t

, (4) where, for convenience, we have defined, wt(x) = tr(( dF t(x)−1d2Ft(x)) ∈ RD . At the start, since 

Ed 

> 0

is random, we may assume that p is a zero vector field. Since the dynamics is compressive overall, 

min t≤τ αt < 1, and further, Q 

> t

αt < 1. However, at small t, the vector field Ed 

> 0

is random, and by assumption, vt is uniformly contractive in all directions. Thus, d2vt has a small norm. Thus, we assume that ∥wt∥ ≤ c δt. Thus, in the starting phase we have, P 

> t≤t∗

∥wtEdt R−1 

> t

· · · R−1 

> τ

∥ ≤ 

c t ∗ δt Q 

> t≤τ

α−1 

> t

. Then, from (i)-(iii), ∥wt Edt ∥ ≤ δ1/(τ −t) δt, (see Appendix E) for any t ≥ t∗,

and so, ∥wtEdt R−1 

> t

· · · R−1 

> τ

∥ ≤ δt c 1 δ1/(τ −t) (1 + δ)−τ +t. Now, applying (4) recursively, we obtain that ∥G t(0) ◦ F t∥ = ∥G t(0) ∥ = ∥ P 

> t≤τ

wt Edt R−1 

> t

R−1 

> t+1

· · · R−1 

> t

∥ ≤ c t ∗ δt Q 

> t≤τ

α−1 

> t

+

δt c 1

P 

> t>t ∗

δ1/(τ −t) (1 + δ)−τ +t = O(δt ).

Implications for manifold learning. The above theorem outlines sufficient conditions for the align-ment of the most sensitive directions with the data manifold. There are two important consequences of this result. First, for an aligned and convergent generative model, we expect that any small learning errors in vt will result in probability mass redistributed on approximately the same support. In other words, the predicted density will have the approximately the same support as the target, since the directions orthogonal to the support are superstable (very large finite-time LEs). This is observed in Figure 3, where a generated digit (second column) is perturbed in the direction of the 1st LV (3rd column) to obtain another recognizable digit. On the other hand, when the 100th LV (shown in the 4th column of Figure 3) is added, we obtain artifacts that represent leaving the data manifold. In practice, the Lyapunov vectors may be computed using standard algorithms akin to iterative algorithms for eigenvectors (see [ 20 , 7, 32 ]). Thus, an aligned generative model can effectively be used to compute the tangent bundle of the data manifold. In other words, an aligned generative model can learn the data manifold with the same sample complexity as the generative model, which is stronger than thought in previous works [ 54 , 47 ], which have only shown that generative models learn the dimension of the manifold. 

Regularity of alignment. Secondly, the alignment property itself is robust, i.e., when a generating process has the alignment property, under small perturbations, this property is retained, as we show next. This implies that, even an approximate generating process can be used for manifold learning. 

Lemma 4.4. The alignment property is regular. Proof. Let F τ 

> 0

be a continuously differentiable generating process (i.e., F τ 

> 0

∈ C1(M )) for which alignment holds. Now, consider a sequence ϵk → 0, as k → ∞ , and a sequence of C1 generating processes, F τϵk that converge to F τ 

> 0

in the C1 norm. Let Ed 

> 0

be differentiable (on some open set containing M in RD ). Starting with the same Ed 

> 0

, we may define the most sensitive subspaces, Edτ,ϵ k

for each map F τϵk as per the construction in this section. Then, from the continuity of dF τ , the covariance of Edt , and the continuity of Rτ (see Appendix F), each element of the sequence Edτ,ϵ k is locally continuous (we need to also assume the non-degeneracy of the stretching/compression factors, see Appendix F). Since M is compact, from the Arzela-Ascoli theorem, we can conclude that Edτ,ϵ k

contains a converging subsequence, which retains the alignment property. 

Justification for sufficient conditions. We now describe the type of dynamics of the generating process that would satisfy the sufficient conditions in the theorem above. In the beginning, in the absence of information about the target score, the vector field vt could be uniformly compressive, e.g., in an SGM with the source density being nearly a Gaussian [ 47 , 16 ]. Then, as information about the target is used, the score acquires an anisotropic behavior, and our sufficient conditions imply that correspondingly an anisotropicity must emerge in the vector field as well. Further, this anisotropicity in the vector field must be such that the vector field has small cross-derivatives. That is, while ∇t,d vt,d and ∇t,d ⊥vt,d ⊥ can have large norms, the cross-derivatives, ∇t,d ⊥vt,d and ∇t,d vt,d ⊥

8must be negligible at the end. An SGM typically satisfies this condition, as one can visually see in Figure 1. In the leftmost image in Figure 1, which represents an intermediate time, the score vector field (which is equivalent to vt in an SGM) appears to stretch/compress differential volumes (i.e., it is anisotropic), while at the end (second image in Figure 1), there is very large compression toward the data manifold (the two moons) and the cross-derivatives (in local coordinates) are evidently small. The large compression toward the data manifold has been described from many perspectives before: [ 13 , 26 ] use Fourier analysis, [ 47 ] uses stochastic analysis, [ 54 , 41 ] take the statistical learning and uncertainty quantification perspective. Consistent with these results, our sufficient conditions (Theorem 4.3), when applied to SGMs, imply that the attraction/compression in volumes normal to the data manifold leads to robustness of the support. Notice that under this attraction condition, and (i)-(iii) of Theorem 4.3, we cannot control the norm of the orthogonal component of the score, 

st Ed⊥ 

> t

. This is due to two self-reinforcing effects: the compression factor matrices along Edt have a smaller norm and hence a larger inverse compared to Rt. Secondly, the components of wt do not become small along Ed⊥ 

> t

because the vector field may have non-negligible second derivatives, 

∇2

> t,d ⊥

vt,d ⊥ (one can observe this visually for an SGM in the second column of Figure 1). 

Remark 4.5 (Without the expansion assumption (i)) . If min t αt > 1, notice that Gt ◦ Ft in the proof above is a linear contraction in Rd. In this case as well, the score component along Edt decreases and becomes negligible. However, in practice, generating processes are compressive dynamics, as they acquire more information about the score when t increases. Hence, we allow expansion for some part of the dynamics but assume compression overall. We need not assume any expansion at all, if an observed phase transition [ 1] occurs, wherein Ft becomes linear for t > t ∗, in which case, wt is the zero vector field. 

# 5 Related Work 

Tremendous progress has been achieved in the past few years to explain the empirical success of generative models. Several works, such as [ 15 , 12 , 34 , 35 , 10 ] have established theoretical guarantees for the convergence of diffusion models under different metrics (such as Wasserstein, reverse KL, total variation), including proving that they achieve minimax rates for learning the target [ 43 ], without demanding any functional inequalities (log-concavity) of the target. We do not tackle the question of generalization or convergence in this paper; instead, for small perturbations of generative models that indeed converge, we focus on the related but different question of when the predicted support is still close to the support of the target. Since our approach is dynamical, it applies to any other path on probability space that leads to the target. Hence, our analysis also applies to normalizing flows [45 , 46 ] and flow matching variants [ 37 , 56 ], which can be interpreted as easier-to-train models with specified probability paths. Our sufficient conditions in Theorem 4.3 are consistent with observations made from several different angles on the generative process. For instance, [ 36 ] finds the emergence of linear behavior when the diffusion model starts to generalize, which is consistent with second derivatives of the vector field being small. Other works such as [ 8, 1, 62 ] study phase transitions in the dynamics or regularization effects [6] that leads to generalization. Our work is most closely inspired by analyses and empirical evidence in [ 47 , 13 ], which suggest the robustness of the support in score-based generative models in the context of the manifold hypothesis [ 48 ]. Here, we analyze the dynamics of the reverse process in a way that applies even to non-singular distributions. Further, our splitting in the Lyapunov directions suggests that there is more quantitative geometric information in the generating process about the data manifold beyond just the data dimension [ 54 ]. Although we do not focus on the unboundedness of the score (since our analysis applies also to targets with density) [ 47 , 39 ], our results are consistent with unbounded score components along Ed⊥ 

> τ

, normal to the data manifold (see section 4). We remark that finite-time Lyapunov analysis has been classically used for perturbation analysis of fluid flows in the geophysical fluids literature [ 50 , 21 , 33 ]. The eigenvectors of the Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, which in our notation is dF τ dF τ ⊤, are our Lyapunov vectors; in fluids, these have been used to understand the deformation in the current velocity field due to perturbations/strains in the past. Interestingly, the application of this analysis technique to generative modeling reveals insight into stability to errors in probability flow ODEs. Finally, even though we do not explicitly discuss class-conditional generation and guided diffusions [ 60 , 24 ], our work can potentially guide algorithms for learning projected scores or diffusions on 9a lower-dimensional latent space [ 27 , 9]. Our results establish a theoretical foundation for such projections of the vector field by uncovering the connection between the dynamics and the directions where accurate learning of the vector field is not necessary. 

# 6 Numerical Results 

Apart from the two-moons example we show in Figure 1, we collect many other two-dimensional examples that help with visualizing the vector field and the sufficient conditions in Theorem 4.3. In Appendix G.5, we give an example of a non-robust generating process. We observe that when using flow-matching [ 37 , 56 ], with a source density being the 8 Gaussian density, we do not have the robustness property (see Appendix G.5 for more details, including the Lyapunov vector field). Among high-dimensional examples, we consider MNIST digit generation in Figure 3, but further examples are deferred to G. Using a pretrained model from a score-generative model repository [Github link], we find that adding perturbations of even large norm (when compared to the supremum norm over the pixel values) leads to high-quality images with comparable likelihood scores. Thus, consistent with observations in [ 47 ], we find that SGMs satisfy the robustness property. Finally, we describe an empirical observation that qualitatively confirms our manifold learning results from section 4. For an aligned generative model like the MNIST SGM (see Appendix G.3 for training details), we find that the Lyapunov exponents also provide geometric insight into the data manifold. A small gap arises in the LEs (Figure 3 Bottom) at an index consistent with previous estimates of the effective dimension of the MNIST data distribution [ 48 ]. Beyond index O(20) , the LEs along the more stable directions appear to be continuous, while the top LEs are degenerate, depicting the deformations/perturbations of the most sensitive subspace of the underlying feature space .

# 7 Conclusion and limitations 

Overall, we study the robustness of the support of the density predicted by a generative model, when the underlying vector field (score/drift) is learned with errors. Our results suggest that the tangent spaces of the support being aligned with the most sensitive Lyapunov subspaces leads to robustness (Proposition 4.1 and Theorem 4.3). Since the Lyapunov vectors are efficient to compute, aligned generative models can be used for manifold learning. The computation of LVs can also help us quantitatively distinguish between generative models based on their robustness property. Our proof techniques involve a novel combination of statistical learning with the finite-time perturbation theory of non-autonomous dynamical systems, which could be independently applicable in other settings. Here are some specific practical impacts of our results. 

Preserving invariances : for singular targets in science, the support is often defined by some invariances (conservation laws) and group symmetries. Our results imply that ensuring alignment yields predicted targets that obey these known physical laws. 

Controlling GMs: the most sensitive subspaces we introduce in this work can help design controllers for generative models to bias the target distribution for downstream applications, such as rare event sampling or unlearning. While we defer the details to future work, consider a vector field, ut,representing a control neural network. Given an orbit, say, xt, that leads to an unwanted sample at time τ, our goal will be to train ut such that xt + ut(xt) is a desired orbit. To do this in reduced dimensions, we only need to determine the components utEdt in the most sensitive directions. The wider implication of our results is that the theory of dynamical systems (including perturbation theory and the operator theoretic view) can advance our understanding of as well as provide principled algorithmic improvements to generative modeling and more broadly of probability flow dynamics. 

Limitations. We only provide a sufficient condition and not a necessary condition for alignment and hence robustness. More extensive experimentation with various different generative models is needed to determine the most common scenario where alignment occurs. More advanced and extensive experiments are also needed to understand the prevalence of alignment and therefore robustness in practice. Further, our method of detecting tangent spaces of the data manifold hinges on there being alignment and our results do not explicitly reveal insight into memorization. 10 References 

[1] Beatrice Achilli, Enrico Ventura, Gianluigi Silvestri, Bao Pham, Gabriel Raya, Dmitry Krotov, Carlo Lucibello, and Luca Ambrogioni. Losing dimensions: Geometric memorization in generative diffusion, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.08727 .[2] Michael S Albergo and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Building normalizing flows with stochastic interpolants. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15571 , 2022. [3] Michael S Albergo, Nicholas M Boffi, and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Stochastic interpolants: A unifying framework for flows and diffusions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08797 , 2023. [4] Brian DO Anderson. Reverse-time diffusion equation models. Stochastic Processes and their Applications , 12(3):313–326, 1982. [5] Ludwig Arnold, Christopher KRT Jones, Konstantin Mischaikow, Geneviève Raugel, and Ludwig Arnold. Random dynamical systems . Springer, 1995. [6] Ricardo Baptista, Agnimitra Dasgupta, Nikola B Kovachki, Assad Oberai, and Andrew M Stuart. Memorization and regularization in generative diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.15785 , 2025. [7] Giancarlo Benettin, Luigi Galgani, Antonio Giorgilli, and Jean-Marie Strelcyn. Lyapunov characteristic exponents for smooth dynamical systems and for hamiltonian systems; a method for computing all of them. part 1: Theory. Meccanica , 15:9–20, 1980. [8] Giulio Biroli, Tony Bonnaire, Valentin De Bortoli, and Marc Mézard. Dynamical regimes of diffusion models. Nature Communications , 15(1):9957, 2024. [9] Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 22563–22575, June 2023. [10] Valentin De Bortoli. Convergence of denoising diffusion models under the manifold hypothesis, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.05314 .[11] Valentin De Bortoli, Emile Mathieu, Michael Hutchinson, James Thornton, Yee Whye Teh, and Arnaud Doucet. Riemannian score-based generative modelling, 2022. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2202.02763 .[12] Hongrui Chen, Holden Lee, and Jianfeng Lu. Improved analysis of score-based generative modeling: User-friendly bounds under minimal smoothness assumptions. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett, editors, Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 202 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 4735–4763. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL 

https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/chen23q.html .[13] Minshuo Chen, Kaixuan Huang, Tuo Zhao, and Mengdi Wang. Score approximation, estimation and distribution recovery of diffusion models on low-dimensional data. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 4672–4712. PMLR, 2023. [14] Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary differential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. [15] Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Jerry Li, Yuanzhi Li, Adil Salim, and Anru R Zhang. Sampling is as easy as learning the score: theory for diffusion models with minimal data assumptions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11215 , 2022. [16] Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Holden Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Jianfeng Lu, and Adil Salim. The probability flow ode is provably fast. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:68552–68575, 2023. [17] Valentin De Bortoli. Convergence of denoising diffusion models under the manifold hypothesis. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05314 , 2022. 11 [18] Valentin De Bortoli, James Thornton, Jeremy Heng, and Arnaud Doucet. Diffusion schrödinger bridge with applications to score-based generative modeling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:17695–17709, 2021. [19] Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , 29(6):141–142, 2012. [20] Francesco Ginelli, Pietro Poggi, Alessio Turchi, Hugues Chaté, Roberto Livi, and Antonio Politi. Characterizing dynamics with covariant lyapunov vectors. Physical review letters , 99 (13):130601, 2007. [21] George Haller and Guocheng Yuan. Lagrangian coherent structures and mixing in two-dimensional turbulence. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena , 147(3-4):352–370, 2000. [22] Ulrich G Haussmann and Etienne Pardoux. Time reversal of diffusions. The Annals of Probability , pages 1188–1205, 1986. [23] Desmond J Higham, Xuerong Mao, and Andrew M Stuart. Strong convergence of euler-type methods for nonlinear stochastic differential equations. SIAM journal on numerical analysis ,40(3):1041–1063, 2002. [24] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598 , 2022. [25] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11239 .[26] Zahra Kadkhodaie, Florentin Guth, Eero P. Simoncelli, and Stéphane Mallat. Generalization in diffusion models arises from geometry-adaptive harmonic representations, 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.02557 .[27] Zahra Kadkhodaie, Stéphane Mallat, and Eero P. Simoncelli. Feature-guided score diffusion for sampling conditional densities, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.11646 .[28] Anatole Katok and Boris Hasselblatt. Introduction to the Modern Theory of Dynamical Systems .Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications. Cambridge University Press, 1995. [29] Yuri Kifer. Ergodic theory of random transformations , volume 10. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012. [30] Hiroshi Kunita. Stochastic differential equations based on lévy processes and stochastic flows of diffeomorphisms. In Real and Stochastic Analysis: New Perspectives , pages 305–373. Springer, 2004. [31] Hiroshi Kunita and Hiroshi Kunita. Stochastic flows and stochastic differential equations ,volume 24. Cambridge university press, 1990. [32] Pavel V Kuptsov and Ulrich Parlitz. Theory and computation of covariant lyapunov vectors. 

Journal of nonlinear science , 22:727–762, 2012. [33] Guillaume Lapeyre. Characterization of finite-time lyapunov exponents and vectors in two-dimensional turbulence. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science , 12(3): 688–698, 2002. [34] Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence of score-based generative modeling for general data distributions. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory , pages 946–985. PMLR, 2023. [35] Gen Li, Yuting Wei, Yuejie Chi, and Yuxin Chen. A sharp convergence theory for the probability flow odes of diffusion models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.02320 .12 [36] Xiang Li, Yixiang Dai, and Qing Qu. Understanding generalizability of diffusion mod-els requires rethinking the hidden gaussian structure. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 57499–57538. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/file/ 69e68611ec4d8c0ae4a4b2bece165f5f-Paper-Conference.pdf .[37] Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matthew Le. Flow matching for generative modeling. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PqvMRDCJT9t .[38] Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and qiang liu. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data with rectified flow. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=XVjTT1nw5z .[39] Yubin Lu, Zhongjian Wang, and Guillaume Bal. Mathematical analysis of singularities in the diffusion model under the submanifold assumption, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2301.07882 .[40] Morteza Mardani, Noah Brenowitz, Yair Cohen, Jaideep Pathak, Chieh-Yu Chen, Cheng-Chin Liu, Arash Vahdat, Mohammad Amin Nabian, Tao Ge, Akshay Subramaniam, et al. Residual corrective diffusion modeling for km-scale atmospheric downscaling. Communications Earth & Environment , 6(1):124, 2025. [41] Nikiforos Mimikos-Stamatopoulos, Benjamin J. Zhang, and Markos A. Katsoulakis. Score-based generative models are provably robust: an uncertainty quantification perspective. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 63154–63183. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/ 2024/file/7371b5f5fab9fd401c4ebd352f29dc48-Paper-Conference.pdf .[42] Alex Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.09672 .[43] Kazusato Oko, Shunta Akiyama, and Taiji Suzuki. Diffusion models are minimax optimal distribution estimators. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 26517–26582. PMLR, 2023. [44] Bernt Øksendal and Bernt Øksendal. Stochastic differential equations . Springer, 2003. [45] Derek Onken, Samy Wu Fung, Xingjian Li, and Lars Ruthotto. Ot-flow: Fast and accurate continuous normalizing flows via optimal transport. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 35, pages 9223–9232, 2021. [46] George Papamakarios, Eric Nalisnick, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Balaji Lakshminarayanan. Normalizing flows for probabilistic modeling and inference. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 22(57):1–64, 2021. [47] Jakiw Pidstrigach. Score-based generative models detect manifolds. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:35852–35865, 2022. [48] Phil Pope, Chen Zhu, Ahmed Abdelkader, Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. The intrinsic dimension of images and its impact on learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=XJk19XzGq2J .[49] Bernhard Schölkopf, John C Platt, John Shawe-Taylor, Alex J Smola, and Robert C Williamson. Estimating the support of a high-dimensional distribution. Neural computation , 13(7):1443– 1471, 2001. [50] Shawn C Shadden, Francois Lekien, and Jerrold E Marsden. Definition and properties of la-grangian coherent structures from finite-time lyapunov exponents in two-dimensional aperiodic flows. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena , 212(3-4):271–304, 2005. 13 [51] Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsuper-vised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learning , pages 2256–2265. pmlr, 2015. [52] Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13456 , 2020. [53] Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=PxTIG12RRHS .[54] Jan Pawel Stanczuk, Georgios Batzolis, Teo Deveney, and Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb. Diffusion models encode the intrinsic dimension of data manifolds. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=a0XiA6v256 .[55] Yifeng Tian, Nishant Panda, and Yen Ting Lin. Liouville flow importance sampler. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=OMKNBzf6HJ .[56] Alexander Tong, Kilian FATRAS, Nikolay Malkin, Guillaume Huguet, Yanlei Zhang, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Guy Wolf, and Yoshua Bengio. Improving and generalizing flow-based genera-tive models with minibatch optimal transport. Transactions on Machine Learning Research ,2024. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=CD9Snc73AW . Expert Certification. [57] Alexander Y. Tong, Nikolay Malkin, Kilian Fatras, Lazar Atanackovic, Yanlei Zhang, Guillaume Huguet, Guy Wolf, and Yoshua Bengio. Simulation-free Schrödinger bridges via score and flow matching. In Sanjoy Dasgupta, Stephan Mandt, and Yingzhen Li, editors, Proceedings of The 27th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , volume 238 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1279–1287. PMLR, 02–04 May 2024. URL 

https://proceedings.mlr.press/v238/tong24a.html .[58] Régis Vert, Jean-Philippe Vert, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Consistency and convergence rates of one-class svms and related algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 7(5), 2006. [59] Phil Wang. denoising-diffusion-pytorch. https://github.com/lucidrains/ denoising-diffusion-pytorch , 2024. Accessed: 2025-05-16. [60] Ling Yang, Zhilong Zhang, Yang Song, Shenda Hong, Runsheng Xu, Yue Zhao, Wentao Zhang, Bin Cui, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Diffusion models: A comprehensive survey of methods and applications. ACM Computing Surveys , 56(4):1–39, 2023. [61] Cagatay Yildiz, Markus Heinonen, and Harri Lahdesmaki. Ode2vae: Deep generative second order odes with bayesian neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,32, 2019. [62] Huijie Zhang, Jinfan Zhou, Yifu Lu, Minzhe Guo, Peng Wang, Liyue Shen, and Qing Qu. The emergence of reproducibility and generalizability in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05264 , 2023. 14 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Claims made in the abstract and the motivating questions in the introduction are precisely those addressed in the main body of the paper. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Our limitations are discussed at the end of section 7. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [Yes] 15 Justification: any assumption or proof step that was too long for the main paper is placed in its own appendix section and referenced. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The code necessary to replicate the low dimensional results does not require any training, and is included in the supplementary material. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

16 Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We do not provide any new datasets. Access to the code that reproduces the figures is provided in the supplementary material. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The low dimensional computations are via numerical methods and do not need neural network training. The MNIST training and architecture is described in the supplement. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: our paper does not perform statistical tests, but probability distributions and uncertainty estimates are shown accurately. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. 17 • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Training and architecture details are provided in appendix F. Experiments were performed on available hardware. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: Since this is a theoretical study on the behavior of generative models under perturbation, our methods cannot be directly used to cause harm. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [NA] Justification: This is a theoretical study of the behavior of generative models. This paper aims to further our understanding of the dynamics of generative modeling. Our results impacts society only indirectly, through the potential improvements that follow as a result of our understanding. 18 Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [NA] Justification: Our code only serves to justify the theory and our models are only trained on benchmark datasets. We do not foresee it used in a dangerous manner. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: All datasets and codes are cited and used in accordance to their license agreements. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. 19 • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [Yes] Justification: the datasets generated and the code for computing Lyapunov vectors is included in the supplementary material. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [NA] Justification: This study does not involve human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [NA] Justification: This is not a study with human participants. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. 20 • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [NA] Justification: LLMs were sometimes used superficially, to understand technical concepts, and generate standard implementation. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM )for what should or should not be described. 21 A Background on the random dynamical systems view of diffusion models 

In the main text, we define the generating process of any generative modeling algorithm as a random dynamical system. In particular, dynamical generative models like normalizing flow, rectified flow, conditional flow matching-variants, stochastic interpolants [ 46 , 37 , 56 , 38 ] etc can be viewed as nonautonomous (forced in a time-dependent manner) and deterministic dynamical system. On the other hand, diffusion models or score-based generative models [ 18 , 60 , 10 , 42 , 52 ] have stochastic generating processes (reverse or denoising process). However, in the main text, we argued that, for the purpose of analyzing the probability flow, we may ignore the noise in the reverse process, and thus, also consider SGMs to be nonautonomous but deterministic systems. Here, we present a more general dynamical systems definition applicable to both deterministic and stochastic nonautnomous systems. These, so-called random dynamical systems have been classically studied as part of dynamical systems theory, while undergoing parallel development in the probability and stochastic analysis communities (see e.g., [ 5] and [ 31 ] for textbook expositions of random dynamical systems from the dynamical systems/ergodic theory and probabilistic/stochastic analysis perspectives respectively). The unifying random dynamical systems framework to represent generative models is as follows. Consider an instance of a time-discretized Wiener path, Ξ = {ξ0, · · · , ξ T −1}, where ξi are indepen-dent standard normal variables. These provide stochastic forcing to the dynamics , F Ξ 

> t

, at time t, 

which is now extended with a superscript Ξ to indicate a fixed noise path. For a fixed noise, Ξ, F τ, Ξ,

is defined as a composition (time τ -dynamics) as expected, F τ, Ξ = F Ξ  

> τ−1

◦ F τ −1,Ξ, with F 0,Ξ = Id ,

for all Ξ.

Example: score-based diffusion [ 51 , 52 ] In score-based diffusion models, the generating process is an Ito process of the form: dX t = ft(Xt) dt + dW t, where ft is a deterministic score term that is represented as a neural network, and Wt is a Wiener path/Brownian noise. Given a time-integration scheme for this stochastic process, we can define Ft, Ξ as the stochastic flow over a short time. For instance, using Euler-Maruyama time-integration with a fixed timestep, δt , we have 

Xt+1 = Xt + ft(Xt) δt + √δt ξ t. Then, F Ξ 

> t

(x) := x + δtf t(x) + √δt ξ t. In summary, we view a stochastic generating process as a one-parameter family of random diffeomorphisms, F Ξ 

> t

, for (almost) every time sampling, Ξ, of the underlying Brownian path. For the existence of this one-parameter family, we refer to classical works on stochastic flows [ 31 , 30 ]. With this RDS view, the stochastic process (a continuous-state discrete-time Markov chain) has a time-dependent transition kernel that can now be written in terms of F Ξ as: 

Pt(Xt+1 ∈ A|Xt = x) = P(ξ : F Ξ 

> t

(x) ∈ A).

Substituting for F Ξ 

> t

(x) = x + δtf t(x) + √δt ξ t, and using the fact that ξt has a normal distribution, we get, Pt(A|x) = R 

> A

e−∥ y−x−δtf t(x)∥2/(2 δt ) dy for this example process. The usual equation for the evolution of the probability measures, say μt, is the Kolmogorov forward equation, which is given by, 

μt+1 (A) = 

Z

Pt(A|x)dμ t(x) = 

Z

P(ξt : F Ξ 

> t

(x) ∈ A) dμ t(x). (5) On the right hand side of the above equation, notice the transition kernels written in terms of the RDS. Moreover, beyond μt, we can also define a sequence of sample-path measures , μΞ 

> t

, which are obtained for fixed Brownian paths via pushforwards or the Frobenius-Perron operator, 

μΞ 

> t+1

= F Ξ 

> t♯

μΞ 

> t

:= μΞ 

> t

◦ F Ξ,−1 

> t

. (6) Since we start the process with X0 ∼ μ0, we take μΞ0 = μ0 for all paths Ξ. We note that since μ0

typically has a density (with respect to Lebesgue Rd), say, ρ0, μ t as well as the sample-path measures, 

μΞ 

> t

also have densities up to a finite time, even when F Ξ 

> t

is a non-volume preserving diffeomorphism. We denote these densities as ρt and ρΞ 

> t

respectively corresponding to μt and μΞ 

> t

. With the density ρΞ

> t

defined, we can use the change-of-variables formula in (6) to obtain, 

ρΞ 

> t+1

= LΞ 

> t

ρΞ 

> t

:= ρΞ 

> t

◦ F Ξ,−1

> t

|det ∇F Ξ 

> t

| ◦ F Ξ,−1

> t

, (7) where we define LΞ 

> t

to be a time-dependent linear operator that transforms densities through a deterministic system. Combining with the Kolmogorov forward equation in (5), we also have, 

ρt+1 (y) = EΞLΞ 

> t

ρΞ 

> t

, (8) 22 provided ρ0 = ρΞ0 , where we have used EΞ to denote expectation with respect to the independent standard Gaussian RVs, Ξ = [ ξ0, · · · , ξ τ −1].

For a fixed noise Ξ, the deterministic dynamics F τ, Ξ is a coupling between ρ0 and a noise path-dependent density ρΞ 

> τ

, i.e., Lτ, Ξρ0 = ρΞ 

> τ

. Here, the operator Lτ, Ξ is called the Frobenius-Perron or transfer operator, which describes the evolution of probability densities through the map, F τ, Ξ. The Frobenius-Perron operator Lτ, Ξ is also defined as a composition of per-iteration operators, which we denote by LΞ 

> t

, so that LΞ 

> t

ρΞ 

> t

= ρΞ

> t+1

. Specifically, we define LΞ 

> t

ρ = ( ρ ∆vol t) ◦ F Ξ−1 

> t

, where 

∆vol t(x) = |det( dF Ξ 

> t

)|−1 indicates the change of differential volume under the application of the map F Ξ 

> t

. Note that, since the noise Ξ is independent of the state, ∆vol t is not a function of Ξ. In the standard stochastic analysis literature, we generally refer to EΞLΞ 

> t

as the Kolmogorov forward 

operator, which is described in (5) when μt are absolutely continuous with respect to Lebesgue. By definition, EΞLΞ 

> t

ρt = ρt+1 . Classically, we may write, ρt+1 (x) = R 

> M

κt(x, y ) ρt(y) dy, 

where κt(x, y ) is the conditional density of the transition kernel, Pt(y, dx ), which represents the conditional density of the state at time t + 1 being x conditioned on the state at time t being y. This assumes the kernel is absolutely continuous in both arguments, which is typical for diffusion-based models (e.g., the transition probability measure in (5) is absolutely continuous). When the target measure, μτ = pdata is singular, making ρτ undefined, the probability density ρτ −∆ for a small ∆

approximates a notion of density associated with the target. For simplicity, ρτ in this case should be interpreted as ρτ −∆, which is a convolution of the target measure, pdata , with a Gaussian of variance 

∆.

A.1 Diffusion models 

Our paper treats the reverse process of a diffusion model as a random dynamical system. While we presented this view in the main text and the previous section, here we review the more standard view through SDEs. Diffusion models generate samples from an unknown target probability distribution 

π ∈ P (RD ) from which we only have access to samples. The general setup [ 52 ] is to consider a diffusion process, which will be referred to as the forward process , that transforms the target into a distribution that is easy to sample from. Typically, the forward process is chosen from a class of Ornstein-Uhlenbeck processes 

dX t = −βtXt dt + p2βtdB , X0 ∼ π. (9) It is assumed that βt is positive and integrable such that the integral R t 

> 0

βs ds → ∞ as t → ∞ . It follows that (9) is a time-rescaling of the standard Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, through the time change of variables τ = R t 

> 0

βs ds and the marginals ρt converge geometrically to the standard multivariate normal distribution N (0 , I D ) ∈ P (RD ). Since (9) has linear drift, it follows that the solutions can be solved analytically, yielding the formula for the marginals in terms of the target 

ρt(x) = EX0∼π [ρt(x|X0)] with the conditional density given by the kernel 

ρt(·| x0) = N



exp 



−

Z t

> 0

βs ds 



x0;



1 − exp 



−2

Z t

> 0

βs ds 

 

ID



. (10) We note here that the above kernel is smooth in the space variable, implying the C∞ smoothness for the marginals for all t > 0.

The forward process is ergodic, with the marginals converging to the standard normal at rate 

exp 



− R t 

> 0

βs ds 



. After a finite large time T samples are assumed to be approximately normal. Once T is chosen, define the time-reversed process Yt := XT −t, t ∈ [0 , T ). It it is known ([ 22 ], [ 4]) that Yt is a Markov process and that it is a weak solution to the following stochastic integral 

dY t = βT −t (Yt + 2 ∇ log ρT −t(Yt)) dt + p2βT −tdB t, Y0 ∼ ρT . (11) From the smoothness of the marginals ρt — and hence smoothness of the drift term y + 2 ∇ log ρt(y)

— it follows that (11) admits a strong solution for times t < T . It follows from weak uniqueness of the backward process [ 44 ] that the law of YT −t coincides with that of Xt. Hence, generating trajectories from the reverse process provides a way of sampling from the target distribution as t → T .The backward process is only defined for times t < T . In order to extend the backward process to the full time interval t ∈ [0 , T ], one needs the assumption on the initial density that ∇ log ρ0 = ∇ log π

23 exists in a weak L2 sense [ 22 ]. However, in practice this is almost never satisfied as the target density is typically singular. This implies a singularity in the score st that grows as 1R t   

> 0βsds

as t → 0. To overcome this issue, the backward process is typically only sampled up to time t = T − ∆, which is responsible for the characteristic noise typically present in image models. 

# B Response of the predicted density to learning errors 

In the main paper, we argued that we may ignore the noise term ξ for a fixed path in probability space, and simply consider the deterministic nonautonomous system. Here we show how to extend the perturbation response result in section 3 to random dynamical systems. Using the framework presented in section A, we may go through the same derivation as in section 3 pathwise, by replacing 

Lt with LΞ 

> t

. Again, the density ρΞ 

> τ

, is close to the target (on averaging with respect to the noise paths, 

Ξ), but not exactly equal. In case the target density with respect to Lebesgue does not exist, we can perform integration by parts and treat ρΞ 

> τ

as a genuine density due to the convolution of the target measure with Gaussians that describes the ρΞ 

> τ

in the discrete time algorithm (DDPM). As before, we consider f to be constant functions on the data manifold that are differentiably extended to Rd. The pathwise responses derived in this way contain pathwise score functions, sΞ which are not the same as the score functions, s. While EρΞ = ρ, we do not get the score by taking expectations of the pathwise scores. In order to compute sΞ however, we may recursively apply the log gradient of the change of variables through the map, F Ξ, i.e., LΞ 

> t

. The above pathwise statistical response, if uniformly bounded over the Wiener paths, due to dominated convergence, allows us to exchange limits, and thus, the overall statistical response can still be computed pathwise via, 

⟨f, ∂ ϵ|ϵ=0 EΞ LT, Ξ 

> ϵ

ρ0⟩ = ⟨f, EΞ ∂ϵLT, Ξ 

> ϵ

|ϵ=0 ρ0⟩. (12) 

# C Tangent dynamics: evolution of infinitesimal perturbations 

The primary objective of this work is to study the effect of learning errors on the dynamics. For stochastic generative processes, we can extend the linear perturbation analysis in the main text to each noise realization of an RDS. As before, to model the effect of score learning errors, we consider evolving Ft, Ξ with perturbed scores of the form, st + ϵχ t, where χt is a time-dependent vector field that indicates the direction of the error in the score. The perturbed dynamics, for a fixed noise path, is represented as, F t, Ξ 

> ϵ

= F Ξ 

> t−1,ϵ

◦ · · · ◦ · · · F Ξ0 , and correspondingly, the perturbed densities, by 

F t, Ξ 

> ϵ♯

ρ0 = ρΞ

> t,ϵ

, leading to the perturbed predicted density, ρτ,ϵ , when we take an expectation over noise realizations Ξ. We can set ζt := ∂ϵF t, Ξ 

> ϵ

to represent a time-dependent vector field that gives the perturbation in the state (sample) at time t due to the learning error field. Taking ϵ → 0, we can obtain the following recursive relationship for ζt :

ζt+1 ◦ F Ξ 

> t

= dF Ξ 

> t

ζt + χt ◦ F Ξ 

> t

, (13) simply by applying chain rule. Unrolling this recursion, and since ζΞ0 = ∂ϵF 0,Ξ 

> ϵ

= ∂ϵId = 0 

identically as a vector field, we obtain, 

ζΞ 

> t+1

◦ Ft =

> t

X

> n=0

dF t dF t−1 ◦ F −1 

> t−1

· · · dF n+1 ◦ F −1 

> n+1

◦ · · · ◦ F −1 

> t−1

χn. (14) A vector field can be evaluated at a specific point, say x ∈ RD , to give a tangent vector , that indicates the direction of infinitesimal change at x. An interpretation of this infinitesimal change when viewed through differentiable scalar fields is the following. If g : RD → R is a scalar function on the domain, then, at x, a vector field represents one among the possible directions of an infinitesimal change in g. In other words, tangent vector fields can be thought of as (linear) operators which when acting on differentiable functions produce their directional derivatives at each point. As an example, 

ζt(x) ∈ RD is a tangent vector that can be used to produce the directional derivative of any g, as 

dg (x) · ζt(x) := lim ϵ→0(g(x + ϵζ t(x)) − g(x)) /ϵ. In this sense, there is a natural interpretation for the sequence of vector fields defined in (13) . Let us fix an orbit/sample path, {xt = F Ξ 

> t

(xt−1)}. The tangent vectors ζt(xt) ∈ RD can be applied to a scalar function g to obtain the overall infinitesimal change in g along the sample path due to infinitesimal learning errors. More precisely, 

∂ϵ(g ◦ F t, Ξ)( x0) = dg (xt) · ζt(xt). (15) 24 Rewriting (14) to make ζt(xt) explicit along a fixed sample path, 

ζt(xt) = 

> t−1

X

> n=0

dF t−1(xt−1) · · · dF n+1 (xn+1 ) χn(xn+1 ). (16) Each term in the above sum consists of multiplication by a sequence of matrices. Let us define 

At := dF t(xt) ∈ RD×D and the product An,t := At At−1 · · · An, for 0 ≤ n ≤ t − 1, for the sake of shorter notation. That is, the perturbation vector ζt(xt) can now be written as 

ζt+1 (xt+1 ) := 

> t

X

> n=0

An+1 ,t χn(xn+1 ). (17) To analyze the effect of infinitesimal errors on infinitely long sample paths, we can let n → −∞ in the above equation. In this case, the asymptotic behavior of the product of random matrices comes into play. Oseledets theory (see e.g., [ 5 ]) is a collection of classical results on random matrix products as applied to cocycles defined on dynamical systems. Essentially, assuming that max {0, log ∥At∥} is summable for almost all paths, one can define Lyapunov exponents (for each Ξ) to be the logarithms of the set of eigenvalues of the matrix, lim n→−∞ (A⊤

> n,t

An,t )1/2( t−n). Corresponding to the Lyapunov exponents (LE), there is a decomposition of the tangent space at each t in the characteristic directions called Oseledets subspaces, i.e., directions in which the perturbation norms grow at an exponential rate corresponding to a given LE. Thus, to analyze the growth/decay of the norms in the time-dependent linear dynamical system (13) , these characteristic directions form a natural basis. Here, since our dynamical system is defined only over a finite time interval, we consider a computational proxy for the Oseledets spaces, which are described in the main text (section 4). In the remainder of this section, we let n → −∞ and review Oseledets theorem. Ignoring the control or forcing (inhomogeneous) term in 13, to isolate the time-asymptotic growth/decay on an exponential scale, we can consider the following homogeneous tangent equation, 

ωt+1 = At ωt. (18) If we are only interested in growth/decay on an exponential (in t) scale, finite sums for n close to 

t in (17) are not significant. Moreover, the vectors χn(xn+1 ) are path-dependent and perturbation-dependent, and they are not fundamental directions characteristic of the dynamics. Thus, by consider-ing a decomposition (as in section 4) of χt(xt) along Oseledets spaces, we can provide a pessimistic analysis, since a random vector χt(xt) will, with probability 1, have a non-zero component in the leading Oseledets space at xt.

The homogeneous tangent equation (18) gives the evolution of infinitesimal perturbations in the initial conditions, i.e., ωt := dF t, Ξ ω0.. This equation gives the most general evolution of infinitesimal perturbations along a generic sample path {xt}. When xt is invariant, i.e., a fixed point, At is also invariant, and this reduces to linear stability analysis. When xt is a periodic orbit, the matrices At are classically studied with Floquet theory and corresponding exponents. In more generality, the random matrix product An,t (xn) : Txn RD → Txt RD , known as the tangent propagator [ 32 ], is studied as 

n → −∞ under Oseledets multiplicative ergodic theorem. When the dynamics Ft is invertible, we consider the limit 

W −(t) = lim 

> n→−∞

 A−⊤  

> n,t

A−1

> n,t

1/(2( t−n)) .

The eigenvectors ϕi(t) of W −(t) are called the backward Lyapunov vectors (BLVs) , and the negative log of the singular values λi = − log σi are called the Lyapunov exponents. Conventionally, the LEs are still deterministic and are defined by taking expectations with respect to the noise paths Ξ. The vectors ϕi(t) form a basis for the tangent space at xt are defined for P-a.e. (for almost every noise realization). For an exposition on the ergodic theory for RDS, see [ 29 ]. When the distribution P does not depend on time, the Backward Lyapunov vectors can also be defined in a deterministic manner 

P − a.e. 

# D Robustness of the support upon alignment 

Proposition 4.1 shows that with high probability an aligned and convergent generative model can be used to learn the support of the data distribution accurately. First, by convergence, we mean that the 25 generating process enjoys a theoretical convergence result in Wasserstein metric. For instance, we can consider a convergence result from [ 34 ] for denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM), a time-discrete diffusion model. For any general target with compact support, as we have assumed, suppose the score is learned with a L2 error O(ϵ), uniformly over time t ≤ τ. Then, [ 34 ] show that the Wasserstein-2 distance between the predicted density, ρτ,ϵ and the target pdata is O(ϵ1/18 ). Note that, by definition of Wasserstein-2 distance, if T is the optimal transport map between pdata and 

ρτ,ϵ , then, Ex∼pdata ∥T (x) − x∥2 ≤ Cϵ ′, where T (x) ∼ ρτ,ϵ . Now since ∥T (x) − x∥ is a random variable with a small mean and variance, we can get an ϵ0 (applying Chebyshev’s inequality e.g.) in the statement of Proposition 4.1 given any δ > 0, such that with probability (over n independent draws from pdata ) ≥ 1 − δ/ 2, we have that ∥T (xi) − xi∥ ≤ ϵ0, for all i ≤ n. 

Next we examine the alignment property. In Proposition 4.1, we assume alignment with high probability. That is, with probability ≥ 1 − δ/ 2 over independent draws from pdata , alignment holds, i.e., at the generated samples, T (xi), the most sensitive Lyapunov subspace Ed is tangent to the support of pdata . In other words, the generated samples T (xi) = xi + ϵh i, where hi is along T ∂M. 

Now consider a one-classifier trained to predict 1 if a data point is on the support and -1 otherwise. A kernel-based classifier is always realizable for a discrete data distribution [ 49 ]. It is a one-class classifier because for all the data points xi, the output label is 1 and we do not have negative samples. A key observation is that the confidence margin of a (one-class) hyperplane classifier trained using 

xi is the same as that trained using T (xi). Therefore, we can apply a known generalization result, and going further, even data-dependent upper and lower bounds for classification using the true data distribution to now the predicted distribution, provided the prediction is aligned (margin does not change). This is the essence of the proof. In summary, we pose learning the support as estimating a one-class classifier. Then, we use the fact that the margin does not change when we move data points along the separating hyperplane. 

# E Alignment proofs 

In the proof of Theorem 4.3, we make assumptions about the dynamics of the vector field vt, whose time-discretized flow is our dynamics, F t. Mainly, toward the end, when t > t ∗, we assume specific anisotropic behavior of the vector field. It is helpful to think of the anisotropy by considering local coordinates that align the first d coordinates with the most sensitive subspaces, Edt . In other words, consider local coordinates, Φt : RD → RD around xt, such that, Φt(0) = xt and dΦt(0) maps the first d standard basis vectors to Edt .

Recall assumptions (i)-(iii) in the statement of Theorem 4.3. Consider the Jacobian matrix at time 

t, dF t(x) in block form, dF t(x) = 

Id + δt ∇t,d vt,d (x) δt ∇t,d ⊥vt,d (x)

δt ∇t,d vt,d ⊥(x) Id + δt ∇t,d ⊥vt,d ⊥(x)



, and the second derivative d2Ft can be written as two block tensors: 

 δt ∇2

> t,dd

vt,d (x) δt ∇2

> t,dd ⊥

vt,d (x)

δt ∇2

> t,dd

vt,d ⊥(x) δt ∇2

> t,dd ⊥

vt,d ⊥(x)



and 

 δt ∇2

> t,dd ⊥

vt,d (x) δt ∇2

> t,d ⊥d⊥

vt,d (x)

δt ∇2

> t,dd ⊥

vt,d ⊥(x) δt ∇2

> t,dd ⊥

vt,d ⊥(x)



. To obtain an estimate of wt := tr(( dF t)−1 d2Ft), we first observe that using assumptions (ii)-(iii), the Schur complement of the first dxd block of dF t

reduces to Id + δt ∇t,d ⊥vt,d ⊥. Using this Schur complement and assumption iii, we obtain that the first block of wt, which is wtEdt is given by δt tr((Id + δt ∇t,d vt,d )−1 ∇2

> t,dd

vt,d ). Then, using assumption ii, we obtain the estimate in the main text. 

# F Regularity of alignment 

Lemma 4.4 shows a notion of regularity of the alignment property. We show this by using the Arzela-Ascoli theorem on the space of functions Edϵ , for some ϵ perturbation of the dynamics. Applying Arzela-Ascoli gives the existence of a converging subsequence on this space. This subsequence consists of most sensitive subspaces of perturbed systems, which from convergence, will also be closely aligned with the data manifold if the original dynamics is aligned. To apply Arzela-Ascoli, one sufficient condition is to assume Ft,ϵ ∈ C1+ α since we then obtain that Edϵ is Holder continuous. This is because Edϵ is by construction an orthonormal basis for the column space of dF tϵ , which is 26 Cα. For the Holder continuity of Edϵ , we also need the eigenvalues of dF tϵ to be nondegenerate. With uniform Holder constants and exponents, since M is compact, we get the needed equicontinuity. 

# G Additional numerical experiments 

Our numerical results using score-based diffusions indicate robustness of support in all cases; further, they also show alignment, qualitatively validating the dynamical mechanism for robustness that we show in the main text. We report on the numerical methods, implementation details and our experiments in this section. The supplementary material also contains the code needed to reproduce the figures in the main text. 

G.1 Sampling via reverse diffusion 

In the case of score-based diffusions, our dynamics F τ refers to the Euler-Maruyama discretization of the reverse diffusion (11) . There are various noise schedules βt used in practice. In terms of the continuous time SDE (9) , choosing βt is tantamount to reparameterizing the time variable in the standard Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process via τ = R t 

> 0

βs ds. From a mathematical perspective, the density evolutions are therefore the same. Practically, however, the process has to be discretized and some noise schedules are more robust against time-discretization errors [ 23 ]. For the purpose of this study, we therefore fix the noise schedule to be the cosine noise schedule from [ 42 ] that was shown empirically to yield good FID and NLL scores. We observe that our experimental results on alignment and robustness do not change when using different noise schedules. The cosine noise schedule from [42] translates to the formula for βt given by 

βt = π

(1 + δ) ·

sin 

 π 

> 2

· t+δ

> 1+ δ



cos 

 π 

> 2

· t+δ

> 1+ δ

 .

This comes from the formula for αt = f (t)/f (0) , f (t) = cos 

 t+δ 

> 1+ δ

· π

> 2

2

given in [ 42 ] and noting that αt = exp 



− R t 

> 0

βs ds 



.Once a suitable approximation to the score is acquired, the backward equation (11) is discretized to yield the random dynamical system 

Yn+1 = Fn(Yn, ξ n) := Yn + βT −tn (Yn + 2 sT −tn (Yn)) δt + ξn

p2βT −tn δt, Y0 ∼ N (0 , 1) .

We also study solutions the perturbed system 

Yn+1 = Fn(Yn, ξ n) := Yn + βT −tn (Yn + 2 sT −tn (Yn) + ϵχ T −tn (Yn)) δt + ξn

p2βT −tn δt. 

The perturbation vector χn specifying the error between the original dynamical system Fn(·, ξ n) = 

Fn(·, ξ n; 0) and the perturbed dynamical system Fn(·, ξ n; ϵ), and ϵ measures the strength of the perturbation (see A). The timesteps tn is chosen equispaced with 0 < t 0 < · · · tn = T − ∆ = 1 − ∆,with ∆ controlling the early stopping time to avoid singularities. This corresponds to solving the backward SDE (11) from t = T − t0 backward to t = ∆ .

G.2 Two dimensional examples 

We perform a number of experiments on two-dimensional domains with one or two-dimensional support of the target. We show our experiments with the 2 moons distribution in Figures 1(main paper), 8 and 7. We also visualize the Lyapunov vectors on a different example in Figures 4 and 2. Throughout, LVs and LEs are computed using the QR algorithm (a finite-time version of the Gram-Schmidt process from [20]) described in section 4. In these planar experiments, we represent the manifold as a curve (or a collection of curves as in the half-moon example) Γ = {Γ( t) : t ∈ [0 , 1] } ⊂ R2. The target measure is given by dp data = q dγ 

where dγ is the arc-length measure for the curve Γ( t), and q some smooth density. We can compute expectations against π via the parameterization as 

E[g(X)] = 

Z

> Γ

g(x)p(x)ds =

Z 10

g(Γ( t)) p(Γ( t))Γ ′(t) dt. 

27 Figure 4: Score-based diffusion with numerical estimates of the score. Top row: starting density, 

ρ0 and the density at time 0.9. Bottom row: predicted target, ρ1−∆. In each figure, the red curve represents the analytical data manifold. The Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process 9 is a linear SDE with additive noise. The density ρt can therefore be solved analytically [44] via the integral equation 

ρt(x) = 

Z

> Γ

ρt(x|x0)q(x0)ds. 

The kernel ρt(x|x0) is the Green’s function to the associated Fokker-Planck equation and is given by 

ρt(x|x0) = 1

Zt

exp − |x − e− t 

> 2

x0|2

2(1 − e−t)

!

.

The score st = ∇ log ρt can also be solved for in terms of the one dimensional integral 

st(x) = 

R 

> Γ

∇xρt(x|x0)q(x0)ds 

R 

> Γ

ρt(x|x0)q(x0)ds .

Our paper focuses on the propagation of score errors through the dynamics. To validate our theoretical results on the robustness of the support in a stylized setting, and since the integrals involved are tractable in the low-dimensional setting, we estimate the score via quadrature rather than training a neural network. This is done to maintain explicit control of the errors involved in our motivating examples and experiments. 

G.3 MNIST training details 

Here we present additional details on the MNIST results from the main paper. We showed that MNIST generation with diffusion models tends to have robustness of the support. Further, we also observed that our proposed mechanism of alignment holds even in this higher dimensional setting. Specifically, we showed that the leading O(20) (approximately the intrinsic dimension of the support/data manifold) LVs span the tangent spaces to the data manifold. As empirical proof of this, we saw that moving along an LV of a higher index (indices are, by convention, in decreasing order of LEs) takes us off the data manifold. This is shown in more detail in Figure 5. These images are produced by a DDPM where the score model is trained by minimizing the simplified conditioned score matching loss from [25]: 

Lsimple (θ) = Et,x 0,ϵ 

∥ϵ − ϵθ (√αtx0 + √1 − αtϵ, t )∥2 ,

28 Figure 5: Top: Denoising diffusion trajectory sampled by approximating the score using a U-Net architecture trained on the MNIST digit dataset. Middle: The Lyapunov vectors of indices 1, 2, 20, 50 and 100 (from left to right) calculated along the sample trajectory. Notice that the principal Lyapunov vectors recover meaningful features of the sampled digit. The is in contrast to the lower Lyapunov vectors (higher indices indicate smaller LEs), which become progressively more noisy. Bottom: The sample image perturbed in the direction of the Lyapunov vectors in the same column. The Lyapunov vectors represent the principal directions in which errors in the sampling algorithm influence the sampled image. Notice that the principle Lyapunov vectors morph the shape of the sample without destroying image fidelity, whereas the lower Lyapunov vectors destroy image structure. This is consistent with our claim that errors propagate the image tangent to the data manifold. where t ∼ U (σmin , T ), x0 ∼ pdata and ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ). Once again we note that in the continuous setting we have αt = exp 



− R t 

> 0

βsds 



. Training is done in batches of 64 for 30 epochs. The backward process consists of 4000 steps, generating a trajectory of (11) from time T = 0 .9 down to 

∆ = T / 4000 . We use an Adam optimizer with learning rate 2e-5. Once trained, the score approximation is given by sθ (x, t ) = 1√1−αt

ϵθ (x, t ). The neural network ϵθ

is a U-Net, that was implemented in PyTorch by [ 59 ]. The U-Net consists of two down-sampling stages, one mid-level stage, and two up-sampling stages, where the 28 × 28 image is down-sampled to an array of 7 × 7 images and up-sampled again. Each downsampling stage consists of two ResNet layers with SiLU nonlinearity and an Attention layer. The mid-level consists of a ResNet layer followed by an Attention layer followed again by a ResNet layer, before up-sampling in a symmetric fashion. 

G.4 CIFAR-10 

Our perturbation experiments on the CIFAR-10 data distribution also confirm the robustness of the support property exhibited by score-based diffusion models. In Figure 6 (left), we show images sampled by a pretrained generative model from [ 53 ] Github. On the right hand side of Figure 6, we show images generated by the same model with a score perturbation of size 0.1 ( L∞ norm) added to Ft for each t. These samples look visually no different and produce similar likelihood scores, 

≈ 3.7 bits/dim, compared to the predicted samples using the original pretrained score model even for perturbation size up to 1. As expected, this behavior of robustness of the support is reproduced with any stable time-integration scheme, e.g., using predictor-corrector or probability flow ODEs. 29 Figure 6: Left: images predicted by a pre-trained score-generative model by Song et al 2021 [Github link] on CIFAR-10 training images. Right: Predicted images by the model when a size 0.1 perturbation is added to the score vector field. 

G.5 Conditional flow matching 

So far, all our numerical experiments were carried out with diffusion models. Here we compare the robustness of the support across other conceptually different generative models. Specifically, we consider experiments with conditional flow matching variants [ 38 , 37 ] and stochastic interpolants [ 3], and all our experiments are based on the implementation by the TorchCFM package Github. At their core, these dynamical generative models interpolate samples from a source density ρ0 and samples from the target pdata . For instance, a variance-preserving interpolation is used in stochastic interpolants [ 3] and a straight line interpolation is proposed in rectified flow sampling [ 38 ]. In these generative models, a stochastic path such as Xt = (1 − t)X0 + tX 1 + σ(t)ξt, with X0 ∼ ρ0,

X1 ∼ pdata is predetermined, while the probability flow path is computed. This is in contrast to SGMs, where the probability path is predetermined for the reverse process by choice of the forward process. The score approximation is performed for Brownian/OU paths in SGMs, while for other paths in flow matching. Thus, it is natural to ask if the learned dynamics for these different probability paths also possess the robustness property. 

Less robust flow matching models. Following TorchCFM tutorials [ 56 ], we learn vector fields 

vt with an MLP and 256 training samples per epoch from the 2 moons data distribution. The generated probability density is quite accurate for all of these models. In Figure 7 (top left), we show the generated density from Optimal Transport-Conditional Flow matching [ 56 ]. Next, we add a perturbation of size 0.5 and 1.0 in the L∞ norm to the learned vector field vt. The predicted densities for OT-CFM (first row) and stochastic interpolants (third row) seem to show the most robustness to the support, while for non-rectified flow matching the densities do not seem to exhibit robustness of the support, in comparison. Visually, all of these models seem to be less robust (c.f. Figure 1) than score-based diffusions. It is noteworthy that this is not due to the effect of the noise in the diffusion process, as the same robustness is visible even for deterministic time-integration (probability flow ODEs) using the scores. Thus, the robustness seems to be dynamical, with different dynamics on probability space and the loss function/formulation together dictating specific dynamics on sample space. To understand the effect of the dynamics further, we compute the LVs and LEs as before using an iterative QR algorithm. Recall that the LEs are recovered as the time-average of the log diagonal elements of Rt (see section 4 of the main paper). We observe that some paths (i.e., with non-zero probability with respect to the source distribution) may have positive leading LEs, while SGMs were always observed to have stable LEs. We take the source density to be 8 Gaussians, but essentially similar results were obtained with a standard Gaussian source density. In Figure 8, we show the leading LV (in blue) calculated for three different GMs in the top row. Also plotted is the score of the approximate 2 moons density (shown in red) in each case. The model OT-CFM seems to be most consistent with Theorem 4.3, showing most orthogonality with the score, or alignment, among the flow-matching models, but much less compared with diffusion models. To quantify the alignment, we plot the histogram of the absolute value of the dot product between the normalized score vectors. The generative model using optimal transport appears to have the best alignment since the histogram has a faster decay and a sharper peak at 0 (orthogonality between the score and the leading LV). Although Theorem 4.3 only proves that the orthogonality is a sufficient condition for the robustness of the support, it seems to agree qualititatively with the observations in Figure 7. The most aligned model, being OT-CFM, also exhibits most stability of the predicted support to perturbations. Moreover, none of these models are as robust or as aligned as diffusion 30 Figure 7: Top row: (Left) Two moons data distribution generated by an optimal transport-conditional flow matching (OT-CFM) algorithm [ 56 ]. OT-CFM dynamics perturbed by errors in the vector field of 

L∞ norm 0.5 (center) and 1 (right). Middle row: densities predicted by non-rectified flow matching model with perturbations of size 0.5 (left) and 1.0 (right). Bottom: densities predicted by perturbed stochastic interpolant models. models for the same target. These interesting results can open up avenues to pinpoint the most prevalent cause of robustness or lack thereof of the support. Furthermore, our results can be a starting point to understanding the deep connection between the dynamics on sample space that leads to robustness and the dynamics on probability space (which does not uniquely determine the sample space dynamics). 31 Figure 8: Top row: the target score vector field (blue) and the top LV (red) computed using unperturbed GMs: OT-CFM (left), CFM (center) and stochastic interpolant (right). Bottom row: the histograms of the dot products (absolute value) between the normalized target score and the leading LV (red) over 40,000 points. We see that the stochastic interpolant model and CFM are less aligned than OT-CFM according to our definition in this case. 32